that client who needs some back up alternative . ( as for example when the woman has forgot to take her contraceptive pill ) .
when everything gets burnt then after filtering this oil and applying two - three times on the head arunshika is soon destroyed .
in dementia produced due to the disease named Alzheimer the loss of memory takes place very slowly about which many times for up to several years there is no knowledge .
do not let lack of water happen in summer .
the windows were open .
apply juice of cucumber on face you will get relief .
the feeling of flies flying in front of the eyes , appearance of black spots , appearance of colorful star-like things all around the light , blindness in eyes etc . .
due to these losses the conditions of stiffness of the arteries , diabetes , cataract and premature agreeing arise .
if &apos; techiotomy &apos; is not done and the disease advances then the whole neck swells , glottis becomes fat , the speed of pulse becomes 130 to 135 per minute with fever or without fever , the patient becomes horribly thin .
after sometime the patient of schizophrenia starts paying less attention to hygiene even , like not taking bath for several days , not brushing , not changing clothes etc .
hold the upper portion of the leg &apos; s heel with hand .
now Radha feeds Muniya half bowl of food even five - six times in a day .
but those youngsters whose father now was suffering from the above problem , their young children had the danger of pimples only twice more .
Queens - empresses used to apply them for bringing out the natural color of hair .
those who do not get out for stroll cause a to of harm to body .
as a consequence of the deficiency of calcium occurrence of ostomellisia is possible .
diabetes , problems of liver are removed by the practice of suryamudra .
on occurrence of hypothermia these systems may stop working .
apart from this regular and uninterrupted breast feeding is also considered to be a good contraceptive .
swelling and pain recedes by applying juice of onion on a honey bee bite .
if it gets cut somewhere on the body or if a boil comes up then by squashing a pod of garlic on it there is relief .
by feeding 3 masha churna roasting in cow ghee with 7 masha khatmi ke luab morning and evening stiffness and torsion end .
difficult tumors are cancer .
while bathing apply all over your body cow dung mixed in a little salt and lemon .
if feeding outer milk is important then do not use the canned milk .
bryonia - 30 : liver swells along with expanding , you feel a sting in the location of liver .
so that for the citizens reliable reproduction and health can be ensured .
in this way the blood loss stops even without surgery .
the control over the activities of will or mind alone is yoga .
cry openly .
one should wash clothes and utensils with lukewarm water in the winter .
the complication of not having control on urination , the problem of leaking on its own may occur due to the reason of diseases of urinary system or the various diseases of organs situated close to it .
due to S . . . fear of constant wetness and the stink arising out of it makes them conscious of the huge inconvenience .
sunshine is disinfectent .
by applying neem oil not just the pimples are destroyed but the wounds growing out of itching also becomes alright .
heaviness of body , much increase in weight .
on the other hand those people who are full of happiness and enthusiasm and who are optimistic have a great energy level .
if the age of women goes up to 50 years then mammogram should be done every year .
your stomach stays clean by drinking water after getting up in the morning .
vaccination : to save liver from virus of Hepatitis B a very effective vaccine is available .
conditioner has necessary elements , which give nutrition to the hair .
50 % diseases of the uterus can be successfully treated with TCRE by histroscopy without open surgery and sewing .
but from fear of surgery or considering hernia as a less serious disease can put the patient &apos; s life at risk .
if you are thinking of going to the parlor then be careful .
it happens to be quite beneficial in dandruff control .
through these medicines , injections even more dirt gets accumulated in the body .
if you take peanuts in the afternoon then take popcorn in its place .
also he can become helpless physically .
there are seven colous in the sun rays .
it is considered in yoga tradition that with continuous practice of khechari mudra the yogi begins to get the taste of nectar juice .
in VAT surgery all those surgeries are possible through a thin telescope by reaching the backbone while watching on a TV screen , which were possible before on cutting open the chest .
which has spread in other parts of the body as well .
here the method of practice of Janushirasana is presented - sit stretching both the legs forward .
sometimes ulcer creates a hole by eating up the abdominal or dudenal wall , due to which bacteria and half-digested food jumps to the abdominal cavity ( paritonium ) which increases the infection in abdominal cavity and the wall .
patient can lead a normal life but if cancer is in its first stage .
does its influence increase in summer .
there are many methods of taking anima .
liver inflammation or viral disease of liver ( hepatitis ) is more dangerous for young people than children .
our brain of around 1 . to 1 . kilogram weight seems to be made of soft matter of brown color .
there is relief in two to three weeks by drinking fifty grams of orange Sun heated water thrice a day mixing eight to ten particles of candy in it .
the Greek and American styles of winter cycle is taught .
nausea starts occurring .
Travelling through our body blood pushes the waste towards lungs .
you should always have food one fourth less than hunger .
after death can body parts be taken out in home ?
take a big watermelon and fill a gram of sugar in it after making a small hole .
muscles , tendons and nerves are also affected .
because of strong antioxidants bran oil provides much more anti oxidation stabitlity as compared to other oils .
otherwise there is possibility of nozzle coming out by the speed of water , gas or stool .
having stress in the fast life of today is a common thing but removing it is also easy .
due to this reason the child becomes victim of lack of nutrition or malnutrition .
many people are afflicted with hypersomnia .
in serious situations vision of your eye can go .
during laughing many muscles become get activated in our body face .
you can have something light like toast / sandwich / egg / cornflakes .
by International Urology Association such an estimation has been made that 1 out of 3 women at some point in their life has to face S . . .
pavana-muktasana is beneficial in pyrosis , heart disease , arthritis and waist pain etc .
mouth is freshened by chewing 5 grams aniseed or coriander or cardamom .
patient has a lot of difficulty in dry cough .
it will be better that you take care of skin regularly so that lustre of skin sustains during extreme winters .
do not cut your nails quite deep rather cut straight .
the intestines fail to absorb these medicines completely .
it is also referred to as the third eye of Shiva .
if you are giving balanced food consisting of fruits and vegetables then this food will fulfil the requirement of vitamin and mineral .
the fever of gonorrohea is 104 degree fahrenheit , speed of the veins quickly increase to 108 to 110 per minute .
there are three properties of man - saatvik , rajasik and tamasik , these properties are decided on the basis of balance of tridosh and the entire mental health depends on it .
but doctors tell us that some kinds of cholesterol are good for our health .
during winter one should keep the mustard oil with the cooked parsley filled in a bottle after the child birth .
every designated place of the body has a fixed importance for our health .
the job of nutritionists and dieticians is to give the right information of those food substances to people which are helpful in maintaining their health .
diagnostic histroscopy can be used in all those diseases where dialotation and curetaz is needed .
you donate only 1 / 20 part of it .
by going on chewing piece of mulethi there is relief in sore throat .
generally doctors make an estimate if there is hernia or not through the symptoms told by the patient , his family history and the examination of regions like groin , navel etc .
bleeding because of ulcer or cancer .
SAAOL that is , science and art of living , is a technique of treatment of heart based on natural treatment .
by this tiredness is removed and one gets relief .
this is the very reason that problem of split hair also occurs .
if there is vomiting then by drinking sun heated blue water in small amounts in small intervals there is relief in this disease .
because of an amount of Potassium , Vitamin B6 , folic acid and the amount of soluble fibers being present banana is considered .
this surgery famous by the name of hernioplasty can be done with the help of laparoscopy , endoscopy , etc .
these spots are more on face and hands .
it is the primary duty of every mother - father to get the child injected with the vaccine of polio in order to save from handicapness .
keep taking medicine with regular examination as required .
if negative thoughts enter you mind even after all this or stress remains then get help from some perofessional counsellor .
she was a patient whose mother treated her till the time the disease had completely settled down .
if there is a habit of drinking alcohol then advice of leaving it is given .
because of less absorption of iron in old age possibility of occurrence of anemia can increase .
H . . . destroys most of the CD-4 cells and thus the immune system of infected person gets destroyed .
eat more green leafy vegetables .
wandering uselessly , without any aim , tiring the one &apos; s body is foolishness only and also with it there is also the reduction of life - force .
do not accumulate broken vessels , tyre , polythene bag on the rooves of the houses and nearby .
after twenty - four hours computer warms the body of patient slowly . after the next 12 hours the medicines by which patient is kept in a sleep are stopped then doctors study the reactions of the patient .
we can overcome this problem , provided we stay cautious .
come let us start with the arrival of a newborn baby .
if some member in the family is ill or he has infection etc then keep his towel separately .
Basilinum - 200 : it is the main medicine of this disease .
after this the H . . . attacks other CD-4 cells , and this process is repeated again and again .
although for common flu you can rest at home itself .
fruit and vegetable prevent the food from getting rotten in the intestine and this way also support in keeping the body disease free as well .
the seeds of red mustard are a little blackish brown and are soft and little rough to touch .
by this acid pump ( the main place of acid secretion ) is stoped .
that is why it is living food .
this condition changes in a little while .
mix two spoons pure vinegar in six spoons water and apply on scalp with cotton before sleeping .
this way one could do 3 to 6 cycles of this method .
dry and wet cough persists in its patient at all times .
not warming up before exercise , exercise in summer or thickening of muscles is responsible for it .
if attention is given to hygiene in food habits and life style then gastroenteritis can be prevented to a great extent .
the storage of your memory is limited .
one feels heat in body .
they are the best medium of making skin healthy , smooth and soft in every way .
brain also produces obstruction in the respiratory system of the body , due to this spasms occur while taking breath , these spasms are basically hiccups .
doctor , nurse or the female health worker doing counselling helps the woman in identifying as to which days in the month are unsafe .
the time required in the lithoptysis technique depends on the size of the stone and its number .
eye allergy , temporary or permanent blindness , side effect , reducing of eye vision , conjuctivitis , purple color in cornea and swelling in eyes etc can happen in eyes during holi .
weight , fatness , cough , tummy , etc increase on going to bed to sleep immediately after meal .
if wound occurs in the knot then also being cautious is important .
while working in the parlor from use of gloves by the beautician danger of spreading of infection is absent .
carbon Dioxide is that very waste which gets expelled through respiration .
if iron pills / capsules are consumed for a long time in a large amount or more iron reaches inside body from other reasons then it starts accumulating in the various body parts of body specially liver , muscles of heart , endocrinal glands .
but get the copper T fixed only when there is no pregnancy .
by giving 7 masha atariphal kashneej or atariphal sagir in the evening patient of sabal has a lot of benefit .
an alternative from being saved from contaminated food materials may be branded items , but many times complaints may arise even in them .
the first sign of heart inactivity is fatigue .
on a person victim of manic depression seizures of hysteria or depression can occur or fits of both one after the other can occur but to most of the patients fits of depression instead of hysteria occur .
contraceptive injectable are of two types .
yes care of eyes is equally important as that of other body parts .
there is a possibility of delay from enema of plain water .
through the surgical treatment the effort of making the patients of cerebral palsy normal is ongoing .
lens is fitted in the capsular bag .
the people who do hard work they should always take the food full of nutritious elements in their diet .
all bacteria will be removed by it .
infection in urinary bladder is called cystitis .
with the end of day or after physical work intensity of pain increases .
in this season stale food should not be eaten .
patient of malikholia stays quiet , silent while patient of insanity appears a bit excited and mischievous .
use of hot water is useful in diagnosis of gonorrhoea , bavasir , liver disease , backache , cough borne diseases , gas disease , throat disease , boils - pimples , hiccups and other diseases .
some people cough more during daytime .
difficulty in speech .
for at least 6 months the mother should breastfeed her child .
the people who get an attack of hives or allergy they should immediately use medicine .
type 2 diabetes : this happens due to a person &apos; s irregular lifestyle of which carelessness in diet , to keep sitting , body being bulky are main .
small obstacles like carpet , etc being spread on floor starts becoming the cause of their fall .
do you go on working in a polluted environment ?
youngsters suffer from headache a lot because of masturbation .
use of dryer on hair roots also stops hair growth and makes them rough and lifeless .
with this your body will be safe from dehydration and dark circles will not be formed .
we do n &apos;t pay much attention to it considering ramada a disease occuring while playing around .
Caustocum - 30 : if face of wart is sharp like that of prick then this medicine is right for such a patient .
keeps you energy level high .
many out of these reactive species are free radicals and consist of one or more extra electron .
now without surgery it is possible to gain control over it with Saitron therapy .
it has often been seen that the hair of 20-30 year old men falls gradually and after some time they become bald to a great extent .
it strengthens the repositories of immunity system .
by putting one - two drops in ear it ( insect ) swells and comes out .
on the directions of the Government of India service is being made available at 39 PHCs and 26 CHCs with the goal to provide secure childbirth from 8 o &apos;clock at night to 7 o &apos;clock in the morning at PHCs and CHCs .
during this time NMF is finished , the cells are not able to develop properly because of the end of the water .
but its not even like it can be considered a problem of increasing age because , due to weakening of pelvis muscles and tissues connected to them on account of pregnancy , labor , continuously picking up heavy things , menopause or obesity , the disease occurs .
also removing stress , anxiety , tension it keeps us healthy .
deficiency of iron also occurs by occurrence of infection of blood sucking hookworms in intestines , excessive bleeding during periods in women , bleeding from intestines or other parts of body .
do you cough during a weather change ?
padmasana is helpful in the concentration and Pranoththana of mind .
in stomach diseases those who have indigestion , appetite is less , because of acidity there is burning in the chest those should not consume fried things in the breakfast .
because of financial situation not being good the upbringing of the produced child does not take place correctly .
there is also prevention of breast tumor , ectopic pregnancy and rheumatoid arthritis .
reduce the use of cooking oils also .
for example , one out of two kidneys ( because one kidney is enough for the activities of body ) , part of digestive gland ( because half digestive gland is enough for pancreatic activities ) and some part of liver ( because that small portion that you donate grows again with time ) can be donated .
from a ton of rose leaves only 1 litre essential oil is obtained which is equivalent to 25 grammes of herbal cream .
our hands are involved in transferring the germs of most of the contagious diseases from one person to the other person .
according to allopathy physicians production of shahika ( whooping cough ) happens because of &apos; hemophilus pertussis &apos; bacteria .
after consuming 15 to 20 grams of manjitharishth or khadirarishtha with equal quantity of water both times after dinner the complication of arunshika is also removed because of destruction of ringworm - itching and blood problems .
there I breathing problem in it .
cornea is the clear window in front of the eye which covers them .
the pile patients should first of all control their diet .
when there is no pain in the knees then you should not use toilets with commodes .
after remaining in this posture for some time while exhaling lift up the back and bend down the head .
patient gets vertigo .
the parents of the children who control more regarding food that eat this , do not eat this in them also the chances of occurrence of such a problem are more .
whether the patient has any disease from among gonorrhoea , syphilis , tuberculosis , heart related disease , nephritis etc ?
also the closed skin pores of body will open up .
in such time it is the moral responsibility of all the males of the household and the neighborhood to give blood .
if there is no benefit by belladonna then use silica 6x medicine .
most of the sexually generated disease get completely treated with proper treatment .
you can also do sugar monitoring ( empty stomach . hours after lunch 2 hours after dinner . ) .
they make themselves so busy in the daily life that even if they want they are not able to spare time for the exercise .
problem of hyper pigmentation arises by overstimulation of these melanin cells in some parts of skin .
therefore it is recommended to administer its vaccination to the children at the earliest possible .
in the present times many countries mainly Italy , China and New Zealand have adopted it in the form of commercial plantation .
as compared to milk nutritious substances obtained from curd are better .
in the first three months of pregnancy you should not take fennel , peppermint and rosemary and after three months also you should use mixture of only 1 percent and put only 3 percent drops in water for bath .
it is processed seven times in the ash of Godanti Adiyog .
patient has most difficulty during excreting .
complete it .
therefore to compensate for these elements you should give easily digestible and full of vitamin food .
grinding leaves of hemp extremely fine with cow milk , applying on making a salve swelling of khurujul makad ends .
if the ois of the children flows then put one drop of lime water in the ear with the dropper .
the surgery with phaco machine is done with utmost care .
normally because of arthritis or other disorders the walking around of elderly people reduces therefore they get a disorder of functional incontinence .
those food materials which are obtained maximum from the nature in that month , is generally considered to be good from the point of view of health .
tuberculosis , pneumonia etc . encircle .
in dhanurasana the appearance of the body would become like a bow with the cord stretched .
please take information by contacting the blood bank of some local Indian Red Cross .
symptom : stomach ulcer can arise due to many causes .
acid nitric is a potent medicine in curing all three problems of sora , psychosis and syphilis .
by doing gargle with salt mixed warm water not only does the throat infection get healed but studies say that by doing gargle like this daily one can get protected from cough and cold also .
the aroma of this medicine is sharp and masculine like that of nutmeg .
till that time we will not even be able to count up to five .
make the brush move in a circular manner on gums and teeth .
bitata stains - although there could be difference in the shape , place and design of the bitata stains but they are similar in appearance .
some woman faces some problem and some faces some other problem among these .
these negative waves could be because of any reason like because of envy or prejudice of some other person .
iron being in excess can be fatal , hence to expel it from body injections of ferrol are given regularly .
symptom : vomiting after or before eating .
Ruta . : pain so sharp that patient cries out .
root chakra is the symbol of earth element .
for raw vegetables carrot , radish , cucumber , onion , tomato , lettuce , cabbage and two - three things which are able to be eaten raw should be taken .
as a result opposition was produced among masses towards family planning program .
breathing should be normal .
because of the deficiency of blue color - insomnia , headache , eczema , fver , hemmorhoids , tiredness by more mental work etc . .
robot will cause a revolution in medical world .
navasir is called &apos; fistula &apos; in allopathy .
its aroma is like cajuput but a bit strong .
and use cabbage or salad leaf in place of the topmost slice .
apply juice of garlic on the swelling of body .
various skin diseases like herpes , ringworm make such a layer on the scalp that the hair starts falling and baldness comes .
the part that supports the heel of the shoe should be tough so that it does not become flat .
as a result of the bone breaking often deformity can occur in joints also .
therefore the mission of reproductive and child health program is to make available services of good quality .
Solidago essence - One feels pain of kidney in back and urinary bladder .
patient starts taking a lot of time for bathing , changing , eating and other routine tasks .
do not let water collect near yourself .
in this disease the heart beats strongly and sometimes one feels thirsty and sometimes not .
you will feel less hungry in between and you will prevent eating unnecessarily .
one can prevent skin related problems with a little cautiousness and maintenance of skin .
Radha had fed Muniya with her own milk from the first month her birth and up to four months she had not given her anything apart from her milk .
in fast food hot dog , burger , coke and spring rolls became the first choice of people .
by anointing forehead with white poste grain grinding in 1 tola arq gulab suda nisfi ends .
how many children are alive and how many have died .
diseases of legs and intestines are - gangrene .
unsaturated fats , Omega . fatty acids fiber etc are included .
swim for 45 minutes .
the secretion of gonads gland controls the whole health along with the sexual energy .
this way when the person eats vegetables , etc , pulses and cereals then he takes in the visibly available life-force present in them .
in medical terms it is called &apos; flail chest &apos; or swinging chest .
the women having motherly pleasure now have the option of painless delivery .
one could drink it also in place of plain water .
the arrangement of at least 3 post delivery inspections .
get regular checkups done to the child .
if your fat waist is pointing towards some serious disease then fear not because now scientists have found out a way to lose these fats by apply a single injection of Carbonb dioxide .
decrease of appetite , peptic ulcer , loss of immunity capacity of the body , extreme pain anywhere , continuous cold and flu also are the common problems of tension .
keep eating the nutritious food at home in the same way as was advised earlier .
during winter days he also drinks carrot , tomato juice regularly .
problem of frustration and staying away socially arises in them from psychological stress .
in this disease difference comes in voice , due to which pronunciation does not become clear .
the surgery done for treatment of inguinal hernia is most common .
at the end of one week the swelling decreased .
patient should consume medicine of mixture of vijaysar till 40 days .
visit the doctor from time to time .
can eat pulao , parantha , soup , kheer everything .
therefore medicines should be taken in the beginning and yoga exercises should be done along .
one tablet of lakshmi Vilas Rasa with honey should be given to the adult patient thrice in a day .
in order to stop population growth immediately very solid steps have to be take .
also try to control your sugar and BP , take special care while washing hair .
let us know what is the reason behind this snack attack and one could get rid of this .
this vaseline becomes soft like oil because of the afternoon heat .
the choice of women for abortion .
deliver in hospital on time .
put four-five leaves of basil , some ginger and one spoonful of jaggery in a cup of water and boil it till the time the water becomes half .
by consuming carrot juice everyday deificency of blood in body is cured and body becomes healthy and strong .
apart from this some diseases of the internal parts of chest may also be cured by this method .
continuation phase is of 4-5 months which depends on the category of the treatment patient is taking .
now seeing each part of the body through mind feel each and every component in relaxed and stress-free condition with determination .
for suppressing the dry cough certainly keep a bottle of medicine at home as advised by the doctor .
in every 20 minutes , after taking a 20 second break lookk at an object kept at a distance of 20 feet from you .
mint is produced during summer .
studies have proved that dangers of heart attack and paralysis is more among the people with diabetes than those who do not have diabetes .
taking 1 masha each of all gulzar surkh , peel of pomegranate , green majun grinding and pounding extremely fine strain it through a cloth .
a patient had to take water in the toilet itself out of fear of expulsion of water .
the vaccine of Hepatitis A is pit three times .
during the treatment blood should be tested regularly , one should have clean water and clean food .
fibrous substances also protect from piles .
the reason behind this is that if the amount of carbohydrate in our body becomes excess then that excess carbo will be accumulated as fat in our body which should not happen at all .
nobody has ever invited me for blood donation .
the history of SARS is not very old .
diabetes and heart disease is found more in people who sleep during the day .
you can start the normal daily life in a week .
you should also remember that there should be a gap of three years between two children .
cancer of gall bladder , on increasing , spreads even to the lymph node of stomach then this is also not possible that it be cut and removed from body via surgery .
these things are common in the stressful life of the present world .
one can use serum twice or thrice after cleansing .
when it dries , then wash it with water .
apply milk pack mixed with 2 % HA lotion / Fairy lotion on face and leave for 20 minutes .
the bark medicine of Arjun is very useful in heart disease .
premature greying of hair .
in this the fresh skin comes out very soon while before this when ablative lasers were used then the fresh skin took time to come out .
but along with this experience the unbearable pain of labor is also associated .
when you are typing then the position of your hands should be right .
even if you are not able to look at the pulse then aconite should be used in the sudden fever in which there is restlessness and excessive thirst , the skin becomes dry .
on entrance of water in rectum the urge to defecate will gradually increase .
medication is provided to decrease bleeding and for pain relief and iron is given for treating anemia .
this chakra also influences sacral and root chakra .
in the subtle exercise for the elbow spread the hand in the front by bringing the fingers of both the hands upwards .
after menopause weight of women also starts increasing and this becomes the accessorial reason behind occurrence of the disease .
the nature gives complete support in order to keep each person healthy .
in such a state faeces produces burning sensation and bad gas in stomach .
the cancer of the skin of the genitals is different from the cancer of the skin of the other organs .
every seasoning feels sort of incomplete without bay leaf .
the reason behind this concern is the congenital deformities in the child in the womb by some medicines , but let us also tell this true fact to our readers that the reason behind all congenital deformities is not the medicines administered during pregnancy .
in the declining period of life force , when the breathing becomes cold , the leg below the knees become cold , nerve becomes thin like a rope , there is cold sweating in the hands - legs or the hands - legs of the patient remain like a corpse after becoming cold , then &apos; corbabez &apos; saves the life of the patient .
have such a meal in which amount of fats and calories is less .
it plays an important role in regulating the increased level of cholesterol .
E . Ds are found mostly in teenaged girls and women , but is often found in little children , mentally less developed , and often in normal woman and man .
apply eye cream appropriately around eyes .
therefore take &apos; power breathing &apos; at least thrice a day .
maintain your weight as per your age and height .
tea , coffee are also in fact intoxicating substances , but due to not being much harmful they have been accepted on the social basis .
there is an improvement in the health of the eyes by this exercise .
if you have trouble in going to watch a film or shopping out of fear of urine passage then you are not alone .
in the opinion of natural therapy during this therapy one is inspired to cry .
if level of glycosylated hemoglobin increases by 2 % then by that danger of occurrence of abscess or ulcer increases by 1 . % and danger of amputating a body part increases by 1 . % .
the color of root chakra gonads gland is bright red .
like hand , leg , face etc . .
or take such a shampoo in which conditioner is included .
this ambrosia is a panacea which liberates from extremely dangerous disease of pessimism .
there are more chances of disease of arthritis originating in fat people .
in such a case give benedium . medicine .
instead of mugging up a subject on understanding it discuss with friends .
the elements that develops then is produced in the front part of the pituitary gland .
some out of these are used by man .
of course , in complications immediately after treatment bleeding in urine and feeling of intense pain in 1-2 micturition are included .
the symptoms of the disease of hysteria are as follows .
hence it is important that to prevent depression one adopts limited and balanced meals and follows the following things strictly .
get it treated on getting detected .
for easy digestion the food materials should be cooked properly .
among these muscles , bones , ligament , joint lining and joint cover are also included .
you should not try to absolutely break high fever .
the natural sharcara present in the milk is called lactose .
although the production of gas is common , but sometimes it produces restlessness and other conditions .
if possible go out somewhere with friends or family .
why do lymph nodes enlarge in stomach ?
in epilepsy and loss of appetite also orange is very beneficial .
sometime a change related to the decrease or increase in the quantity of blood occurs .
the food items rich with Vitamin A Are cheap as well as locally available .
this type of mental disorder is also known by the name of swing ( maniac depressive disorder ) or bipolar disorder .
the complications during birth like foreceps delivery can have influence on the ear .
this disease is produced more because of diarrhoea and constipation .
you will stay fit by its regular consumption and signs of aging will also stay away from you .
if something enters inside the ears of the child then do not try to take them out by your own self .
because of cough inside the lungs patient sort of suffocates .
heart inactivity - In this condition heart is unable to work efficiently and becomes unsuccessful in controlling blood in lungs and others parts of body .
flu also occurs due to virus infection .
dhruvasana removes the fickleness of the mind .
in the method of tarasana standing as before lift up both the hands from the back while inhaling deeply .
due to this reason right treatment is not received on time and the condition of the patient becomes serious .
by making the patient drink a jam of Indian gooseberry washing with water , applying silver foil , grinding in water 3 masha dry coriander . masha seeds of kulfa and 5 seeds of plum , straining with 2 tola nilufer sorbet everyday in the evening there is a lot of benefit in malikholia .
eyes getting red with fever .
rheumatoid arthritis disease generally starts slowly .
if the bodies of whale and man are made equal then the human brain would look bigger even more than 150 times of the brain of whale .
in such a situation corbabez 30 or 200 should be given at every half an hour or even more quickly .
you find lesions of various depths around the roots of teeth .
do not let your child use the goblet of some other glass - there can be germs present in the glass used for drinking water .
in the ears of some people there is excessive production of scum in the ear or the scum becomes very hard .
because he is donating his blood due to his poverty , not on the basis of humanity .
which reasons influence the immunity system of children ?
some obesity specialists believe that in two to four weeks after eating more than necessary size of stomach starts expanding .
with newest technique , bioelectronic tissue , cartilage of joints can be developed again .
but when Roger Sperry severed the contact between the two hemispheres then how special is the place of each in our mental activities was estimated for the first time .
drink plenty of water .
symptom . prior to childbirth ovaries are hidden in a layer that keeps the intestines covered .
therefore in this book the information of soil and water is given in special way .
you can lead a simple and good life by taking care of yourself and following advice of doctor .
it takes less than one minute to bring the food or liquid material into the door of the mouth .
the symptoms of this disease are as follows .
headache and lack of appetite because of sunstroke in summer .
the patient of schizophrenia seems scared without reason .
during tension , body and mind both get tired therefore body has need for abundant food for nutritious substances .
the sun rays leave the medicinal properties of that very color in the water which is the color of that bottle .
while taking henna out of hair use fresh or lukewarm water .
the massage of the face should begin with the cheeks .
according to Ayurvedic opinion mint is delicious , interesting , easy in digestion , sharp tasting , bitter , digestive and that which removes nausea .
due to sugar there is also a type of indigestion and constipation .
in the lives of all of us there are many moments worth forgetting .
but the direction gets decided at every synapse , because the chemical messenger which can cross the valley is present at the end of axon and not in the body of the next cell .
blood pressure increases by driving immediately after meal .
how to inspire old people to live a longer life .
the other reason is presence of stiff pieces on the anus itself .
fractional laser suits the most for fine wrinkles and a special glow comes on skin by this .
often signs of aging start showing on this kind of skin .
spectacles are tested after 6 weeks .
tonic for all diseases prepared by sun rays and chomotherapy should be taken .
daatun of Karanj ( Indian Beech ) . is beneficial in diseases stomach diseases like pile , diarrhoea , dyspepsia , stomach worms etc .
otherwise pressure is exterted on eyes needlessly .
symptom . nervous heart - palpitations disease happens more to those people who consume intoxicating substances like tobacco and liquor .
there is benefit in mouth ulcers from gargling with basil essence .
allergic sinitis , bronchitis , asthma or pneumonia may occur in young children .
no , according to &apos; Human body part transplant law 1994 &apos; the selling of human body parts and composition of cells is not allowed .
do not dig your teeth with pin or needle .
increase the quantity of vitamins , minerals , anti oxidants and other nutritive substances and by doing this you can keep your weight under control .
Trigeminal neuralgia is a pain repeatedly arising in face .
you will be amazed to know that if the fan is turned on full speed then they are unable to support themselves when they are not helped .
the main attack on this disease happens more on lungs , bones and intestines .
it would be better that you keep wearing shoes in feet so that water does not fall on them .
and made Muniya drink after every dysentery .
these nutritive substances are protein , fat , vitamins , iron , calcium and minerals etc .
now your child is growing up and his body has started growing .
we call this condition itself endomyosis but treatment of this disease is possible without an operation with the help of uterine artery embolization .
do not consume non seasonal vegetables .
often mother-father have the belief that the baby teeth have to go , even if they break untimely then also there is no effect , while this is not so .
giving information about the harms of smoking and tobacco .
this itself is the reason that possibility of fracture in bones starts increasing with age .
newly blinds become anxious on slight problem and in anxiety fail to even go for little approximation .
for pain in teeth and molars crush a basil leaf and make round pill of it and press it under your molar or tooth , there will benefit as pain will stop .
skin happens to be the safety armor of our body its care needs to be taken all year round .
by consuming less water the activity of metabolism also becomes slow and body starts getting fat .
otherwise in the condition of stomach not getting cleaned , there could be complaints of disorder in eyes , mouth , head and weakness in the muscular system .
if there is no improvement by pulsetila then give caliwai medicine .
one fourth cup to children fro 1 to 3 years .
women can use pills , cream , jelly , sponge etc . which are put in the genitals so that semen can not go inside .
the most posibility of occurrence of GERD is after the lunch in the day .
individuals with cough constitution can use raw sugar with lemon .
the use of anima can be done in all the diseases .
even our country is not different from this .
every year in the entire world nearly 10 lac people end their life by their own hands .
folic acid is one of the 6 most important elements for women . during pregnancy serious consequences can occur from its deficiency .
although you may be liking fried papad in meal but roasted papad are much better in their place .
with cough phlegm also starts coming in throat .
after this dysentery starts .
similarly , hepatitis-B can not be avoided with the vaccination of hepatitis-A .
but carry out this treatment for some days .
not only this , walking becomes impossible .
paste treat them as well , but in this procedure moisture is not effected .
in disease of old cough eat 2-3 cloves of garlic everyday after roasting it in the morning and evening , by this blood increases .
3 persons out of every 5 below 65 years of age have been seen to be patients of arthritis .
according to physicians if one - two tola sorbete bajuri mixing in arq makoy and arq saunf ( both 6 ) is used then disease of jaundice produced with blockage of heart ends .
press in between the palms with your fingers .
learn the difference between cholestrol and fat .
in the entire world death of around 60 thousand children takes place , out of this 99 percent deaths occur only in developing countries .
serious results can be there due to snores .
signal reaches brain from here itself through nervous .
patient should make slight light in the room .
thirst informs of necessity of fluid in body .
several symbols to increase power and energy is taught in reiki course .
cough-cold occurs more in children who drink milk from the bottle in comparison to those who drink mother &apos; s milk .
there should not be serious diseases like high blood pressure , diabetes and heart diseases .
Mammine reduces digestive ability .
tuberculosis infected patients should be treated with the DOTS strategy .
but the quantity of hommocystin gradually goes on decreasing with increasing age .
patient may feel very thirsty but thirst may not quench from drinking water .
out of seven childbirths completing outside the medical institutions only one childbirth ( 14 percent ) is benefitted with post-labour tests within two months .
on getting the heart attack do not give him anything to eat or during apart from the medicine .
similarly , neuro-surgeons operate the brain by cutting the skull bones with saw and drill .
do we take more yawnings when we are tired ?
one feels pain in the location of liver .
it is generally seen that in order to reduce the weight of the body and not to let obesity come the lasses take very less food under dieting and do unnecessary exercise .
among the list of the most poisonous substances tea is placed at the top .
avoid Coca-Cola and other such beverages .
beladona-30 is the best medicine for old metritis it should be used thrice a day .
they psychologically remain in pressure .
do not forget to wash hands with soap after use .
these small holes of the internal lining of the abdomen forms the gastric glands .
how should the quantity of homocystin be reduced ?
every gland has two parts .
skin also remains smooth from it .
brain gets more oxygen with regular exercise , with which the danger of losing memory also decreases .
after making the powder of ... ... ... ... ... ... keep it in a cloth after filtering .
by pressing the head with the hand and hand with the head against each other there is a vibration in the neck .
grinding dry ginger with water or by anointing forehead and temples on abrading headache produced from cold ends .
Shyam Agarwal takes a healthy and balanced diet to stay fit , exercises regularly .
the glands of the joints of the thighs swells .
by applying the paste of the soup of the peels of orange one gets help in making the breasts shapely and attractive .
this disease of otis flow could also occur because of syphilis , tonsilitis and old cough .
no wonder how many people are there who are afflicted with this disease insomnia .
one also gets freedom from violent thoughts by eating by chewing because we all know that when someone is angry the person begins to grinds his teeth .
it happens very fast in women of less age but the situation of complete baldness arises very less in them .
it has been told in a report published in American journal of Clinical Nutrition that from consumption of food substances made in wheat bran oil level of total cholesterol reduces specifically .
to destroy lice and its eggs apply neem oil in head .
an acute burning sensation starts in stomach by accumulation of gas in belly .
in such situation take the child to bahanji immediately and get her administered the medicine of pneumonia .
vrikshasana increases strength , radiance and semen in the body .
do mountain biking for 45 minutes .
not just this , chemicles to color clothes are also used in them .
this medicine is used in the treatment of coryza , bronchitis and genitourinary infection .
by making drink little repeatedly the complaint of indigestion , nausea and intense thirst is removed .
antibacterial and antifungal properties are found in bay leaf .
the most common problem of women is the problem of urine leakage .
positive results of reducing obesity come forward .
they will register cancer patients coming to their outdoor department and post this report to the directorate every month .
there is reduction in spleen by giving 30 to 90 mg benzol capsule with equal amount of olive oil and there is also reduction in the white cells of blood .
keep the hands in the posture of jyanmudra on the knees .
but if bile itself becomes infected meaning defected for a certain reason then produces various diseases in the body .
if diluted , thick , yellowish blood mixed pus flows from inside the ear the mercsol medicine is also beneficial .
in hemophilia disease mostly death occurs merely at the age of eight years .
more important is this that blood donation is a &apos; healthy habit &apos; because you feel very satisfied with it that you are helping to save the lives of many people .
by always applying salve of 20 grams fresh leaves of pomegranate on grinding in 100 grams water possibility of miscarriage does not remain .
actually the teeth become weak only when the gums and teeth are not cleaned properly .
apart from chill there is also vomiting in malaria .
sulphur - 30 : stomach fills up and bloats on eating just a little .
open and dirty toilets , open sewers , twittering of the flies also increase the number of trachoma disease .
the lady doctor should wash her hands with warm water and soap and dry it and again wash it with anti-bacterial lotion before carrying out this test .
many times this injury can be so small that it may not be detected .
abstain from strong medicines .
generally this is done in one episode .
the maximum number of tuberculosis patients in the world are found in India .
any healthy man or woman of 18 - 60 years can donate blood .
the swelling increases while lifting weight or putting pressure during micturition or defecation .
in between meals snacks should be given .
in some parts of America and Africa beans is considered to be the main source of protein .
is science , history or business possible if we are not able to tell each other our thoughts through language , or not make them permanent by writing .
on diagnosing such patients a tenderness is found in caecum and the left iliac region and some fever also occurs .
as such public does not have any knowledge of small road accidents .
after the birth of a healthy child there is less difficulty in his nurturing and there is also great gain in his physical and mental development .
urine sort of keeps dropping .
if signs of under mentioned symptoms become visible then immediately go to hospital or health center .
it is also its speciality that formation of much cough decreases by its consumption .
make a powder pounding and grinding carom seeds and black pepper in equal amounts .
there is extreme perspiration .
because the virus of polio is found only in the body of human beings its complete eradication is possible .
the quantity of homocystin at least becomes twice from childhood to old age .
Extravagance and useless shopping .
arsenic - 30 : unbearable pain and burning sensation in stomach .
those who have the problem of nostril breaking meaning blood secretions from nose , for them also eating amla is very beneficial .
some men and women suffer from constipation because of jaundice .
there is unlimited variation in his thinking , not definiteness like computer .
if pickle of date palm is eaten with meal then indigestion does not happen and taste of mouth also remains good .
one should wear shoes or slippers with high heels .
in this way you can have upto 2 glass i . . 400 ml juice .
such is believed fat person should not eat potato .
you also go to anganbari by rule and certainly eat the nutritious things that you get from there .
I . . . - Chief of Radiation Department of AIIMS Dr . . . Jhulka has said that presence of chromosome X in men is called klinefelter syndrome .
as the hands would go up , in a similar way the heels of the legs should also remain lifted up .
one may drink one glass carrot or orange else tomato juice .
our class of physicians also does not take rib fracture as seriously as they should take it .
at nearly around 20 years of age allergy is produced by pollen grain to these sensitive individuals .
use of feminine hygiene wash and related products is made by women all over the world for vaginal discharge and outer parts of private parts .
consequently polio infested person has to walk as a lame person or with the help of crutches for the whole life .
you should also mix coriander and ginger in a little amount .
this problem may occur because of the destruction of the nerves of urinary bladder .
counsel the mother repeatedly , till the time it is not sure that the mother has understood this matter that it is essential to give special attention to children suffering from pneumonia .
Dr . . . Sharma , senior consultant of apollo hospital and joint replacement surgeon has to say that arthritis may seem like a distressing disease but saving oneself from cold , having regular exercise and healthy diet people suffering from arthritis can also enjoy the winter .
in pregnancy food should be consumed in the right quantity and nutritive .
treat it on detecting the right cause of disease .
in 95 % people it gets treated in 2 to 4 weeks .
AIDS spreads through the use of unboiled or used needle .
patient does not realize .
it happens after scratching the dryness of skin .
one of these pipes goes to the right and the other to the left lung .
the tumor appears hard and there is no pain in it on touching .
homeopathic medicines are prepared by strengthening by mainly two methods of mixing in the alcohol and dissolving in the sugar of milk .
of course confirmation from other laboratory methods is certainly important .
if proper treatment of sexually infected diseases is not done then complexities may arise in them .
arbovirus is a gram positive single-formula RNA virus .
essential oils prove effective for skin related problems like acne , occurrence of wrinkles , skin with spots and blemishes , infection of skin , sunburn , dark circles all around eyes , etc .
from this record you will get help to do some other activity instead of emotional eating .
in this research mice were given a quantity of curucmin then radiation related problems were seen less in them .
during ancient times ubtan had a lot of significance in .
ajna chakra , throat chakra , soalr plexus , thyroid , spleen and root chakra are the principal ones .
mercsol medicine should be given at the interval of every 8 hours .
what will you do .
massage with oil in hair after hair has dried and wash hair with mild shampoo the next day .
apart from the above mentioned general symptoms in the serious patients suffering from dengue there can also be complaint of bleeding from teeth , mouth and nose .
those with kapha nature should not take cold food rice , curd , buttermilk etc . should not take in excess quantity .
only the tumor is taken out in case of young women who do not want more children .
pain and burning sensation arise .
patients inflicted with diabetes disease take treatment for diabetes but remain oblivious that how many negative effects are there on eyes due to this disease .
in some food substances very little quantity of alpha lipoic acid is found ( example lettuce , meat , potato etc ) .
in a state of much serious deficiency along with discomfiture from cold weather there is a feeling of fatigue , lethargy and restlessness , skin goes dry .
the bacteria out in the air enters into healthy humans through breath and infects the healthy person with tuberculosis .
the cases of cerebral palsy and mental retardation are increasing .
Pyrrheodontist also does the surgery for the creation of gums and the areas near to the teeth .
the child becomes lethargic and the intelligence growth of the brain generally gets retarded or blocked .
it is best to take food in the forenoon from eleven to twelve o &apos;clock .
reproductive and child health ( R . . . ) is a unified program .
think about your prospective child , talk to him sweetly .
there is also ayurvedic treatment of hearing sounds in the ears .
the surgery done by phaco machine is easy , painless and can be done in less time .
go to the anganbari by rule and get nutritious food .
aconite should not be given when there is sweating in the fever .
many juices are present in the fruit of Amla .
the medicine travels in the entire body through the plasma available in the blood .
live vaccine should not be used during pregnancy because it may give rise to diseasee in the child .
avocado , almond , wheat germ , jojoba , peach are good for the treatment of dry skin .
use the tablets of micostatin benzene . . . . or deluson for ten to fourteen days for keeping inside the vagina .
chance of occurrence of gangrene by it remains .
Hydrastis root extract - 30 : Laxity comes in membranes of anus .
in the intestine after destroying the disease causing microbes it increases the friendly microbes .
every month many eggs are developed but in hair follicle only one egg is able to develop .
body temperature becomes less by 2 to 4 degrees than normal temperature .
this way by stopping the medicine in between the immune capacity of bacteria increases , consequently that problem can again start to grow .
wintergreen - Normally this medicine is used in the treatment of muscular pain , pimples , rheumatism , gout , cell swelling / hemolysis and water retention , etc .
infection can also spread by defecation of infected person .
according to Dr . . Balasubramaniam there are many things in the daily life which are considered common but we do not have any explanation of these with us .
these bacteria become innumerable through reproduction and transfer from one person to the other .
why the action site of these medicines are synapse and not the nerve cell itself , to understand it will not be now difficult .
honey has almost 75 % surcura in which fructose , glucose , sulphose , maltose , lactose etc are the main ones .
treatment of skin cancer is done by cutting the cancer infested skin .
when a person consumes excessively oily , sour and hot things then there is production defect in blood from their effect .
escape from giving fried and food material of excess fat .
but this technique can not be brought into use for all the patients .
the right time to drink apple juice is half an hour before meal and before going to sleep .
its aroma happens to be sweet and like narcissus .
when we can survive by eating roti in which there is no violence then what is the need of ending the dear life of any organism by killing it .
deafness can occur because of abnormal cell increase as in the case of blood cancer etc .
especially for adopted children it has already been proved that there is much closeness in their weight and the weight of their real parents in comparison to the weight of their adopted parents .
one must sit at least 20 minutes for yoga and 10 minutes for meditation .
along with this one should eat food slowly chewing very properly .
you have to do only this that you should regularly consume asafoetida and strawberry .
the patients are kept in natural places away from the population .
Dr . Rubini of Naples had saved the life of 592 patients suffering from diarrhoea by camphor .
after this those bottles should be properly closed by putting on the cap .
nux vomica - 30 : presence of gas sometime after meal , stomach ache , feeling heaviness of stomach and burning sensation in chest .
for patients of high blood pressure also eating apple is beneficial .
consequently we pay more attention to rib injury rather than lung injury and overlook lung injury .
among which the principal ones are ulcer , arthritis , problems of kidney , skin disease , insomnia and disinterest towards the study of children etc .
active movement , passive movement and continuous passive movement .
it takes 2 to 4 days for Chikungunia to spread after entering into body .
according to senior orthopaedician Dr . . . Murthy of Fortis hospital situated in New Delhi now through such new techniques and equipment changing hip has become possible .
therefore the role of our spinal cord connected with brain in the form of an extension branch is very important .
Pyleric sphincter separates the stomach from the dudaenum .
according to Unani and Ayurveda physicians production of shahika / whooping cough happens in the form of a light cough on eating spicy things , drinking water in winter season .
taking 1 tola niloufar . tola banfasha . tola marz josh adding to it taking 5 tola each of leaves of green rehan , mint leaves , green leaves of soa . tola gul babuna . tola iklilul malik . tola mulheti and 1 tola bandranj buya , grinding everything a bit make a decoction on boiling in water .
distribution of pills of iron , folic acid to children for protection against anemia .
in case of side effects in any parts of body also there is benefit by sun-warmed green water .
some people begin to eat less in the summer season , which proves to be harmful for the health .
nowadays toothpastes consisting of Fluoride are also available .
in the method of purnamatsyendrasana sitting as earlier keep the left leg on the right thigh near the navel by folding it and fold the right leg near the knee of the left leg by putting the claw towards the outside .
cause . emphysema disease occurs after whooping cough and bronchitis of asthma .
when sonography is done because of some other reason then it is found out that there is a tumor in the uterus .
Chikununya virus is an arbovirus that is considered to be of the family of alphavirus .
do not use it by yourself at night .
overlook activities with too much physical work .
pain reduces by this also .
if you give first aid to somebody then clean your hands properly before and after doing it .
through the medium of meat , fish also worms on reaching body spreading quickly make the person a patient .
bones of patient of this disease start decaying - rotting .
the following programs are being run in the state of Uttarakhand under the Maternity and Infant Welfare Services .
many times one gets to know about new diseases like high blood pressure , anemia , irregular heartbeat .
requirement of hygiene wash of private parts increases even more during menstruation .
as compared to milk nutritious elements obtained from curd are better .
that too such , which the child may eat with interest .
with treament not done on time it can become cancer .
what type of diet can increase the disease resistance of children .
on growth of liver on the right side in the stomach you start feeling some hard heavy weight .
in many situations this disease appears bcause of the decrease in acid .
doctor Sumit Singh informs that youngsters becomes careless as soon as sunlight decreases during winter days and they take off warm clothes .
it is essential for the blood to be basic .
do some things for mind as well , when mind will get a life like that of a mind only then body will be able stay healthy .
the Associate Professor of Department of Surgical Disciplines of AIIMS Sandeep Guleria has said that after donating kidney he wanted to do an assessment of level QOL of life of donor .
female anopheles mosquito breed in dirty water .
one gets relief from the common cold by amla .
it also does the work of anti oxidants .
why is yawning like an infection ?
a special kind of murmur or buzz is heard in their ear , which no one else hears .
the patient also has the complaint of headache , fever and stomach pain .
from the point of view of creation we can divide the brain into many parts .
he had also heard something about hernia .
the meaning of lowering of mortality rate is the preservation of family , healthy nutrition and happiness in the society .
while seeing the movement of ribs keep in mind special things .
one is made to eat powder of Salam Mishri with milk to increase potency and for nutrition of body and to increase libido .
by eating guava after roasting in sand coughing is reduced .
if its an abscess ( solitary ) then apply injection of grain emetine hydrochloride for ten days daily .
use fibrous food material , fresh green leafy vegetables and fruits .
this is an easy procedure .
singhasana is useful in tonsil , thyroid and other throat-related diseases .
there is an excess of nutrients like Calcium , Vitamin &apos; A &apos; . D &apos; , Vitamin &apos; B &apos; - 12 , protein , Potassium , Zinc and Magnesium .
in 100 grams cauliflower 55 mg vitamin C on boiling , 70 mg on steaming or 82 mg on cooking in microwave is found .
by sitting around much also , weight increases .
in ... ... .. . posture press the front part of both the middle and ring finger and thumb after bringing them together .
make him wear soft cotton clothes .
through this nutritious elements mixed in blood and oxygen reach all the aprts of body .
the weakening or ending of the hearing capacity is called deafness .
65 percent of the children in our country don not get any type of dental care .
it is done for free .
they keep eating anything and on focussing on food mind gets diverted from other problems .
plenty of vitamin-B is found in these , which not only saves from cataract , many kind of blindness and other eye diseases but also protect eyes from the harms of ultraviolet rays .
for the treatment of diarrhoea of children the solution of O . . . should be used by the female health workers .
if by chance also he faces such situations then he starts feeling very scared and helpless .
apple is good for health and beauty .
so that the medicines could be made available to far-off districts in time .
today beauty products made of artificial chemicals in the form of beauty materials is quite popular .
the main aim of the family planning program was to reduce birth rate right from the beginning in order to achieve this aim , for which the various techniques of family planning was to be encouraged in the masses .
if the vicious cycle of early marriage and less birth duration is maintained then the prospective children would be weak .
you can choose an appropriate alternative out of these .
what should be the special precaution taken while washing the clothes of the infant ?
acute bronchitis can happen to anyone and normally clears in a few days .
the children from 5 to 14 years of age generally come in the group of school going children .
cooking mustard with thyme and garlic massage your feet with that oil .
a doctor can find out about the disease by inserting gloved finger in the rectum .
by bathing freshness comes to the body , the unwanted heat is satiated and the body becomes pure and light .
by drinking sorbete fasla mixing 4 tola water there is benefit in water deficiency and extreme thirst due to diarrhoea .
get a checkup from a teeth specialist every six months .
since consumption of energy begins as soon as one wakes up therefore it is important that one has a breakfast in such a way that to work there is no lack of energy until lunch .
it is considered a contemptible disease because on making patient ugly it makes flies hover over him .
the infection will be cured by this ointment and the nails will also become shining .
it is important for right development o fhealthy body that during physical development special attention is being paid on eating and drinking of children .
you can also view your mouth in the mirror and in case of any changes , you can take advice of the doctor .
as long as heart beats go on our breaths go on .
so do not do any work continuously .
when mixture starts getting dry then make pills of it the size of grams .
this should be understood that after stopping the injection conception may take some time . ( 6 - 12 months ) .
in this about 70 % iron is coupled with hemoglobin in red blood cells .
in these people of middle class are more .
body starts breaking .
the disease itself is not a special but is merely a symptom of some other disorders .
from constant exercise one can prevent heart disease , diabetes , high blood pressure , diseases of bones , etc along with immune system boost up .
phosphorous - 30 : yellow spots form on stomach of patient .
while aging accidents of falling on slipping in bathroom or falling in stairs that are without a railing occur often .
diseases like ejaculation in dreams , syphillis , blood leukomia , early puberty , quick ejaculation , hair falling , untimely greying of hairs , dizziness in head etc are cured by its use .
this is possible only in the first and second stage .
the quantity of taking the sun-warmed water of blue color should be only from fifty grams to one hundred fifty grams .
in this immense crowd of cells one cell actually does not touch any other cell .
on doing slight labor tiredness comes which goes after taking rest .
2 portions of 3 drops each of sabin vaccine is given empty stomach after mixing in khand with water or milk .
you should use a soft odourless lotion which has no lanolin or mineral oils at all and has least possible emulsion or caustic to clean skin .
for its treatment there are good results by massaging or applying the five-seven drops of blue coconut oil prepared in blue bottle by sun rays and chromotherapy or sun-charged almond mdicine on the head and the palate slowly by tip of the hands for ten-fifteen minutes .
to maintain moisture of skin use a cream based cleanser .
to ask truthfully it is a very big reason of weight increase .
by consuming apple juice after adding sea salt vomiting stops .
as a result of the technique developed in this country new methods of controlling or eradicating polio was discovered in other countries .
treating the mental patient and lessening the difficulty of the family and society .
an attempt is made to make them cry through cry therapy so that they may be able to get out of this shock .
Septilin gives the strength of stopping the infections and helps in not letting infections happen again .
if not then give artificial respiration .
that woman who faced any problem at the time of abortion .
under the first principle the arrangement of administering heavy dose to children between the age of 6 months and 5 years has been done .
there is an extreme pain near the naval because of the formation of ulcer in the abdomen , the problems like vomiting etc could occur .
fat can alone increase your weight but cholestrol alone can not increae your weight .
the heart patient must include light exercises and morning walk in his daily routine .
a comparative detail of the achievements under maternity services till the year of 2001-2002 , 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 has been shown in the following table .
if there are black spots under the eyes then by applying almond oil after mixing honey in it there is benefit .
in arthritis effect is felt on knees and hip joints where the very first impact of pain and injury is seen .
urban Reproductive and Child Health Programme .
it is true the more you eat you can eat more than that .
konayam-3 is the best medicine for barrenness occuring because of the weakness and deprecation of womb .
this works in the form of natural health tonic .
by this treatment there remains no chance of death from their heart , liver diseases .
hence those days if a woman uses the means of birth control or does not have sex with man then she will not get pregnant .
eat fibrous food because constipation does not occur from it .
after remaining in this posture for some time come back in vajrasana .
H . . . stands for &apos; Human Immuno-deficiency Virus &apos; .
in nearly five minutes clot forms from thromboplastine present in blood .
the effect of rabies takes up to several months to appear .
cancer is a group of more than 1000 diseases .
during the investigation one gets to see swelling or bulge of upper surface of skin in hernia affected areas .
keep a shawl necessarily over the body and run the fan to the minimum in the night while sleeping .
therefore the naturopathy doctors should themselves wear clean clothes , keep their body clean and keep the hospital microbes free .
the patinets of cataract are benefitted a lot by the light of green color .
if the anima to increase strength to the intestine is given then cold water should be used .
if the person will get the treatment done and do not quit the habits leading to disease , then is its treatment possible ?
therefore before taking any such decision certainly meet the A . . . first .
keep three quarter cup of dried strawberry or one cup of fresh strawberry in a ceramic bowl and put boiling water in it .
certainly give steam to the child in nose block .
after the surgery just like before there is ejaculation only there are no sperms in these .
trachoma disease occurs due to a bacteria .
the other symptoms of schizophrenia are to stay quiet , not feeling happy or sad at any matter or else staying happy without reason , getting angry without reason , fighting or breaking things , standing at a place for hours without caring for sun light or rain , dancing or singing without reason .
as a result of which the water no longer remains a normal water and becomes prepared like the medicine .
if RH protein ( antigen ) are not found in the red cells of people then they are called RH negative ( RH - ve ) .
elimination of plaque is done by these methods .
tonsilitis generally occurs in the children and teenagers .
from it water of douche entering inside like a fountain cleans everything coming in contact with all parts .
so in comparison with cosmetic surgery with botox treatment wrinkles of face , spots and blemishes and warts , etc can be removed in 24 hours .
the truth is that snores taken while sleeping not only produce noise but during this breathing also stops for a while in the person .
controls temperature and gives help in many health providing functions .
if 30 or 200 or 1000 potency is written simply on some medicines then it should be understood that that medicine is made in centesimal tradition .
such a woman always remains sad .
meals should be clean and nutritious , in which all required elements are combined .
hands - feet go cold .
these people develop symptoms of allergy from consumption of some special English medicines , breathing speed increases .
for this use 10 ml juice regularly .
one suddenly starts feeling lightness , emptiness in head and person falls down .
the sun-charged medicine of vaseline could be prepaed in red and blue color .
in the prostrate gland milk like white fluid substance is made which is carrier of sperms .
early falling of milk teeth due to cavity or of some other reason , is the common reason for teeth becoming zig zag .
it causes extrme pain the ears .
in the method of kandharasana lying down straight keep the legs near the buttocks by folding both the knees .
if you are troubled by corn or warts then never cut corn or warts yourself .
pouring five to six drops of blue oil of Sun charged coconut while sleeping at night slowly massage or rub on scalp for five to six minutes with finger tips .
to prevent it one should start using winter body lotion as soon as the season changes .
at the same time you should not use in the form of chemotherapy of cancer .
use sunscreen in order to escape from skin cancer .
in phlegmatic cough if 2 teaspoons honey , boiled in a half teaspoon glycerine mixed with lemon juice is consumed there is benefit .
with the help of this instrument in special circumstances the woman patient is made to lie on the table for examination and her vagina and the related body parts are examined .
the specialisation of the prosthodontist dentist is in making dentures .
Majorly donation of following parts and cells can be done - Heart , lungs , liver , digestive gland , kidneys , eyes , heart valves , skin , bones , bone marrow , joining tissues , middle part of earand blood vessels .
there is a lot of benefit by applying sun charged coconut oil on the the warts or tip of hamerrhoids .
water keeps temperature of body balanced , increases functionality of skin , increases the circulation of blood .
some people always hear the sound of a bell in their ears .
do not argue with the patient of Alzheimer &apos; s and do not leave him lonely .
C - reactive protein has recently been said marked for heart disease .
urinary bladder swells up .
treatment . patient should escape cold .
the following is be executed in the state under the mental health program .
there was so much expansion and swelling in her uterus that from its pressure the walls of rectum had almost met each other .
in diseases of ear , nose , throat and eyes it is beneficial to take the medicine before going to sleep at night .
its three main types are given below .
suda nisfi or suda shahika is called half sisi meaning ache of half head in common language .
diseases of thoracic spine and VAT surgery .
stomach will cleanse by this remedy and there will be benefit in cold .
its use is done in the form of an aromatic , stimulant and peace giving substance .
but after some days when the child suddenly starts crying , then the mother becomes afraid .
Unani physicians make an efficient medicine of destroying stones of kidneys by cooking scorpions in sesame seed oil .
lips become dry and rough in winters , so apply coconut oil on lips at night and in the morning by this your lips will be moist also and remain blooming with a new freshness .
miscarriage of three to 6 months : after 4 to 6 weeks , get the copper . implanted and see that there is no infection .
this disease is even more infectious than AIDS because it goes very easily into body of another person via blood .
this is because they are ignorant of feminine hygiene wash .
some people stay very attentive towards themselves .
the zygote gets divided into two .
like when you get angry you overeat or eat more sweets in frustration .
danger of infection during surgery can also increase because of diabetes .
not just from today but from the age Mahabharata it has been going on that neither do we want to die nor do we want to accept that it is natural to get older with age .
it normally happens after the age of 50 years and because it occurs in old age it is also called senila cataract .
rose , cajuput , peppermint , lavender , chamomile , cinnamon are helpful in removing indigestion , acidity , and sour burps , etc .
the health is also maintained only when extremely pure and clean water is available .
at first always those matters should be kept in mind which are the symptoms of dangerous situation .
this may be given both in the form of pills or injection .
tongue dries up .
if the skin is not cut , the injury is internal then along with the internal medicine the external medicine works well .
neroli , rose and frankincense remain beneficial .
heart of person in the grips of hypothermia suddenly stops working .
sometimes when blood comes out because of some wound due to injury then immediately put something in the nose by wetting it in the prepared water of blue bottle .
there is restlessness .
on occurrence of problem UTI also water works as medicine .
skin starts becoming dry because of allergy .
because of mucous membrane of vagina being extremely sensitive one should clean it with a fountain nozzle .
without making any effort he can stay sad uninterrupted daily .
do roller skating for 15 minutes .
nature has not kept amla juice in garlic it is understood by this that with the use of garlic amla juice i . . tart juice is forbidden .
only the above-mentioned treatment for hiccup is appropriate because of the imcompleteness in all these treatments .
once on the occurrence of the disease of mania there is always a risk of its occurrence in the future ( especially , if proper treatment is not done ) .
some scientists opine that whatever we see in dreams are views encased in our unconscious mind .
genetic factor may also be a cause for blood pressure .
good health is ultimate bliss .
if the child drinks milk then make him drink milk regularly .
many people may have problem with strong sunlight , heat or cold .
walk a mile each in morning and evening .
after some months surprising changes began to come in my life .
these days due to gas , bile and phlegm separately or by the combination of two or all the three several types of disease must be arising .
what should be done when a child suffers from whooping cough .
the depression which is inside us music takes it out .
this disease is seen in the whole world .
but its high density may lead to the growth of various lethal diseases in the ling run .
fried - roasted , spicy or cold stale food .
from the time of birth to three years of age 1 . gram protein , according to per kilogram weight .
by this patient will have no trouble in knees while taking enema .
if the functioning of the liver is not alright then maximum medicines become inactive .
under the Nation Programme for Control of Blindness the blind people specially cataract affected people are being benefited by surgical operation .
feeling restlessness and nervousness .
also skin of lips gets ready to soak new moisture and treatment .
60 % weight of weight of an adult person is of water itself .
besides this you can also use the Vitamin-C and E tablets .
on the other hand in order to prevent blindness and to avoid the other ill effects of deficiency of Vitamin A the heavy dose of Vitamin A to children from 6 months to 5 years is a short term solution .
it also makes hair dense and healthy .
because of the spinal cord being damaged these women fail to feel the movement of the foetus .
both the hemispheres of cerebrum continued fulfilling their responsibility by controlling the respective halves of the body .
pain persists in head .
among other products honey also has protein , cholestrol , enzyme .
Tykomonosis infection spreads through a parasite .
if the IQ is less than 70 then the man is considered to be mentally retarded .
contraction of sexually transmitted diseases is easy .
for black lips mixing glycerine , lemon and rose water apply on lips everyday .
then also there are many such allopathic medicines which are available in one form only .
as a result of this urine of patient gets viscous .
Anticoangulates &apos; warfaerin &apos; named medicine should not be used in the first stage of pregnancy because it can lead to deformities in the child .
insulin is that which stores glucose converting it to glycogen .
ishal ends by eating 6 to 8 pills of habb ishal ( on consultation with physician ) with water .
paediatrician Dr . Sanjeev Bagai informs that you should make children wear sweaters of full sleeves only or jacket .
often in childhood sunburns occur by roaming a lot in sunlight .
what should be the proper type of food for child ?
on rubbing apple juice with soda on teeth blood stops and crust accumulated on teeth goes away and teeth also start shining getting clean .
eat at least five times in the whole day .
the patient faces restlessness and fever .
in this disease fear of getting fat pervades the heart of patient .
Sanjay had been able to get divine vision only by the development of the third eye .
in medicines there is benefit by giving aspirin , codapyrin , predesin , delta - corlin , canalgesic , soda salycillas , potash iodide , phinastine , ashtiryni , egopyrine , unalgine , butarine , tolserum , butajolydine , delta buta jolydine , lithius carb ar sallicilate .
there are many medicinal qualities in onions , which help in cleaning blood .
patients may need to take enema everyday for one - two months or for a long time during less food intake , fast ,      or other conditions .
Squamous cell cancer , basal cell cancer , melanin cell cancer .
on itching the head forcefully wounds appear in the head and the growth of arunshika starts .
according to these scientists in these diseases there could be psychological reasons also .
there is a complete seizure of production of acid in the abdomen by the medicines for stopping the pump of acid .
their first symptom is this that a certain swollen part of skin becomes red and painful .
you should take two parts of Sun charged blue water prepared by blue bottle and two parts of Sun charged green water prepared by green bottle by the medium of Sun rays and color therapy up to the amount of one hundred and fifty grams on mixing thrice a day on an empty stomach .
11 . mg iron is found in 100 grams cumin seeds .
milk is quite advantageous for pregnant women because there is sufficient amount of nutrients in it .
by rubbing this medicine on chest , waist and throat and nose of patient effect of cough reduces .
there will be redness in the eyes after the cataract operation .
if the increase in weight and obesity becomes a hindrance for the activities of the body then actually it becomes a matter of concern for every person .
taking 1 . spoon from it make the child drink 4 . times a day .
the first milk of mother is thick , yellow and sticky substance , which is called colostrums or first milk .
mind is calm in the morning .
the hormone secreted from thyroid glands is called thyroxin and it controls the growth of the body and the rate of the heart beat .
throat chakra is the best center of spiritual development .
if you use hair drier keep it ten inches away .
there is immense attack on the body in the form of medicine , injection etc .
if you are thinking that cola water is very good for body then know that there are dangerous phosphoric acid in it which takes Calcium completely out of body .
in this way without touching the ground repeat for 5 to 10 times .
similarly many important calculations today are so long and boring that it would be problematic for us to finish them .
that is , one at 40 then second at 50 years of age .
just make a rule of this kind of massage every Sunday then see how skin appears soft - smooth , young and beautiful for years !
whatever is the name of the eye disease if the liquid or tears coming out from the eyes tears the skin or if some patient feels that wherever the fluid of eyes touches it produces burning or itching there and this medicine will remove all the diseases of the eyes .
in many matters women are making the use of this only in the name of women independence , but they do not understand this that how many adverse effects of it can come forward .
taking the right hand from above the right shoulder hold the thumb of the right leg .
you should give this medicine on appearance of blackness in urine .
just after two - three days of surgery he starts working in normal manner .
glowing skin is considered the symbol of being young .
for this one may take juice of carrots , tomatoes and beet root .
both the contact and panoramic kinds of histroscopy can be carried out by the micro histrscope .
never understand this that the first secreted milk is bad or indigestible .
according to them a kind of protein is found in the crystalline lens of our eyes , as we age this lens starts becoming opaque also because of many chemical changes in this protein which later produces cataract in our eyes .
senior paediatrician Dr . . . Bhadauriya told that on not maintaining caution in winters new born or adult falls into the grip of hypothermia .
some medicines are given in the serious disease of the virus of swine flu , like Zanamivir or Oseltamivir .
on getting arunshika itching intensifies at the time of writing - reading .
according to experts stress , anxiety and other negative feelings can make asthama appear .
its mother tincture or the ointment made up of its mother tincture could be used externally .
normally after giving vaginal irrigation of hot or lukewarm water one should give vaginal irrigation of pure cold water .
rice should be eaten with rice water .
normally weight of Indian women also increases a lot by this age .
by vitamin D obtained from it bones and muscles are strengthened .
the difference between the cyst and tumor could also be known by the method of ultrasound .
blood is not able to return back into the heart because by that time these valves shut .
orange - it is a symbol of health and intelligence .
it reduces the burning sensation quickly .
eat food slowly after chewing it properly and the food to be eaten in two times should be taken four - five times .
fever with chill occurs and the patient generally becones unconscious .
because of this infection can emerge in the skin here and there .
they say &apos; like food like mind &apos; meaning our minds becomes the kind of food we eat .
in place of eating two cups of cooked carrots eat two cups of cooked cauliflower .
for relief from this rub both your palms among themselves till they become warm and then put it on your eyes for sixty seconds .
in that situation one should take advice from the doctor .
there was no limitation to my surprise when I saw that the quantity of urine increased quickly .
do n &apos;t apply very harsh ind of cream on the skin under the eyes .
if the x-ray is not done in the initial three months of pregnancy then it would be good .
because of containing 83 percent sucrose it is the sweetest fruit in the world .
if possible then do not wear jewellery during summer days .
this disease can go unbridled because of treatment being expensive .
homeopathic medicine murax should be used thrice a day .
it is possible to prevent occurrence of damage of retina in future by doing right treatment .
the air filled inside the tube should come out .
in malaria disease fever comes following chills and also following sweating .
the problem is again that in condition of cancer occurring in wound generally there is no pain .
some methods of fennel used in domestic treatment proven tested and successful are being presented here .
this is the reason that in comparison to males negative effects of tobacco are seen more in women .
Ruta . : because of getting an injury on bone on any spot swelling occurs on that spot .
enjoy life fully and share your heart with those close .
the womb of many women becomes big during the stoppage of secretion due to which secretion begins in large amount .
there are many benefits of this method like less expenditure , no need of surgery , there is no danger of infection as well and even one does not have to stay in the hospital for more days .
and yes , do not forget one thing that it will give relief in tooth ache , but do not consider it to be one and only cure and take advice of doctor for sure .
cumin protects from flu because of antiseptic properties .
because of the malfunctioning of the bile there is intense itching in the head .
after all why does it happen that in similar situations some people fall sick while some other people continue to be healthy .
during pregnancy you should not use basil , celery , sage , hyssop junior , because by it there is constant fear of miscarriage .
in green vegetables like Fenugreek , coriander and spinach the amount of such calcium is more , which the body digests easily .
the egg gets fertilized and after developing gets converted into a multicelled ball which is called blastocyst .
there is a chance of this number increasing to become about 860 lakh in 2030 .
do you have this problem .
Amniocentesis . one detects problems of foetus by this test also .
in the future the standard methods of laproscopic operation may become prevalent .
after this laugh and laugh strongly .
the patients having diabetes have a good chance of catching the disease of kidney .
some time back a company named Lactasim had also brought this serum in market .
doctor told me that there is infection in my lungs .
due to the stoppage of menstruation cycle there is lot of sweating .
in pregnancy , if during child - birth or within six weeks of child - birth , if the woman dies , then it is called maternal death .
do this morning - evening .
the problems of the kidney go away and by using regularly the weakness , thinness , and etc disorders of the body get destroyed and the body becomes shapely and strong .
behave normally to the patient of Alzheimer &apos; s , do not make fun of him .
repeated cough or roughness in throat , sensation of a change in voice and having difficulty in breathing .
then automatically the problem of leakage of urine arises .
the result of anger is protest , destructive and violent behavior .
happiness - sadness is the cycle of nature which keeps moving .
there is much defect in blood from hindrance in menstruation .
in some cases open surgery is also done .
among the patients drinking milk neither cough was formed nor congestion occurred because of this .
seeing rainbow like colorful ovals in light .
patient should meditate .
in order to get relief in gas give fried asafoetida and black salt and carom seed with luke warm water .
care and arrangement of unwanted conceptions .
doctor has the best information about the treatment of your child .
considering it an ordinary injury they get treatment in small clinics or hospitals .
it will be better if you do not express greed towards the snack near you .
