on occurrence of infection along with consumption of antibiotics there is also relief from their use .
the water of anima should not be much hot , attention should be paid on this .
by making the patient drink a jam of Indian gooseberry washing with water , applying silver foil , grinding in water 3 masha dry coriander . masha seeds of kulfa and 5 seeds of plum , straining with 2 tola nilufer sorbet everyday in the evening there is a lot of benefit in malikholia .
when someone in the house gets cholera keep him in a room separate from the rest of the healthy people in the house , keep his eating utensils also separate .
on the other hand seven - eight hours of a day of office going women - men are spent sitting on the chair .
generally hiccups come to every person and after some time stop on their own .
you can buy this medicine from the chemist by the name of &apos; dava ushshifa &apos; .
the name of this bacteria is microbacterium leprae .
fever , constipation and body ache from cold - Treatment - In fever of this cold one should drink up to hundred grams to two hundred grams Sun charged green water prepared by the medium of Sun rays and color therapy four times a day .
along with it the patient is benefitted moraculously by doing Reiki and with continuous treatment gout is treated completely .
the consumption of alcohol in India is continuously gaining strength .
this is an excellent medicine for such pain .
lack of appetite starts arising .
therefore the practice of both yogasan and pranayam occurs in the action of laughter .
the egg released from the ovary comes to the uterus through the way of these tubes .
because of the weakening of mucous acid and pepsin there is fatal effect on the abdomen and the formation of acid and pepsin begins even more quickly .
with techniques like angioplasty , bypass surgery the successful treatment of heart disease is possible .
boil them with the hot cow milk .
most harm comes to liver from drinking excessive alcohol .
there are no side effects of vaginal tablet .
in this weather skin starts breaking soon because of lack of moisture .
Dr . Chitra Pai , chief of the microbiology department of the hospital said that on the mobile phones maximum 54 . percent &apos; staphylococcus accrues &apos; bacteria were found .
with this your body will be safe from dehydration and dark circles will not be formed .
Blekroplasty is the surgery to give a new shape to upper or lower eyelids .
similarly practice the method of pashuvishramasana from the other side by changing the leg .
sugar , sweets , chocolate , bottled / packeted drinking material are prepared by different chemicals .
if such a patient talk continuously then stremonim will never fail .
if the effect of Myasthenia Gravis disease is seen on the other muscles of the body then the patient faces trouble in movement .
the quantiy of urine in the situation of diabetes increases from three times to twelve-thirteen times of that of normal situation .
when the female patient complains of the symptoms of bleeding or there is some suspicion regarding such symptoms then one should confirm the bleeding at the right time .
put 2-3 drops of water into it and prepare a thin paste .
intelligence measurement scale is a method to measure intelligence prepared by the scientists .
in the context of joints operations of knees and hips are mainly taken into account .
suddenly some factor astounds the heartbeat of their heart forever .
tiredness due to work , stress .
do not forget to gargle properly after brushing . clean tongue and massage gums with finger .
if diluted , thick , yellowish blood mixed pus flows from inside the ear the mercsol medicine is also beneficial .
if the size of this type of hernia is small , that is , less than half inch then it generally gets closed on its own by the time the child reaches the age of two years .
by rubbing this medicine on chest , waist and throat and nose of patient effect of cough reduces .
while counting the rate of breathing special things should be kept in mind .
cure can be more expensive if complications of patient increase else he has to be admitted to the hospital .
from both these stories it is concluded that ajna chara is extremely important for us .
dwickrikasana makes the stomach well-formed .
consequently , his movement becomes very difficult .
900 untrained midwives have been trained in Uttarakhand in the year of 2001-2002 and 2002-03 to provide services of safe labor to pregnant mothers .
corn keeps control of the urinary system , keeps the teeth strong and is also beneficial in heart disease when taken in the form of cornflakes .
you must teach the kids this that whenever they go for toilet etc , they must wash that place very nicely .
excess of sugar in the infected blood decreases your immune strength and the danger of infection increases by this .
the level of hemoglobin is improved by its consumption .
there is more urine .
continuously smoking cigarettes mouth becomes a chimney and stomach becomes a keg of beer .
when tuberculosis disease is present in the country with such horridness then even children can not escape it .
proxima hip ( mini hip ) is such a modern discovery which is an ideal combination between unnatural unsemantid hip replacement ( transposition ) .
complex carbohydrate is also called starch .
besides this you can also use the Vitamin-C and E tablets .
because of medicinal , health boosting qualities and aroma use of cumin seeds in indian food has been happening for ages .
one does not feel pain .
aconite should not be given when there is sweating in the fever .
patient feels pain in the place of kidney .
to repair hiatus hernia .
incubation period of leprosy is three years on an average and this disease grows very slowly .
if feeding outer milk is important then do not use the canned milk .
in case of complete drying of milk use pulsetila-30 thrice a day .
the stoppage of monthly secretion can also take place naturally as after the pregnancy .
you will feel a lot of difference in merely seven days .
body begins to break .
if it &apos; s a small stone then by giving bishop &apos; s citrate of piperine ( of 6 grains ) continuously for many months then stone comes out through urine on dissolving .
you should use a soft odourless lotion which has no lanolin or mineral oils at all and has least possible emulsion or caustic to clean skin .
according to Dr . . . Murthy this surgery is selected for providing relief from any kind of damage or swelling in hip .
at that time he has horrible headache .
dense cauliflower forms from tiny underdeveloped white flowers , green leaves around it protect this flower from strong sunlight .
rather the one and only cause is the stress of a foreign fluid .
when we do a lot of and difficult work then in it energy is reduced in a large quantity and we gain nothing .
means that person remains healthy .
sometimes because of the pregnancy in young age the child even dies .
it also makes body muscular and stops aging .
when is use of birth control not right ?
there is one such speciality in cerebrum which has been a riddle for us even now .
massage , electrocution , special type of exercise and special attention to improve health all these ways are helpful in pacifying thdisease of muscular atrophy .
if you also think such and do not inspire your child for exercise , then in one way you are compromising with his growth .
changing lifestyle may well have given us very good things adopting which we have become modern but along with this we also got new kinds of diseases and we started running after doctors for medicines .
by drinking sun-warmed green water in empty stomach even the oldest constipation is cured .
64 cells of zygote enter inside the uterus .
blood comes from nose and mouth of patient of this disease .
but if thought attentively the sensation on being produced in the finger nerve reaches sensory cortex after crossing spinal cord and brain stem at great speed .
apple may be kept safe for long time .
if you realize a thirst before having meal then surely drink .
saliva removes bacteria and decay stuck in teeth .
test of blood sugar .
according to the &apos; Indian Council of Medical Research &apos; approximately 6 lakhs of 25 - 69 years age class people become victims of death every year due to smoking .
apply the walnut oil into the nostrils of the nose daily .
vaccine of Hepatitis B is helpful in stopping infection of jaundice .
no matter how much busy you are , it is important that you must take out time for physical exercise .
alpha lipoic acid increases the level of glutathione .
throat starts feeling sort of suffocated .
wax that is built in the ear is important for the health of the ear although many people feel filthy at this dirt but it is an important part of the safety system of the ear because this dirt saves the drums of the ear and the internal delicate parts from bacteria , fungus , dust and insects .
along with it there is excruciating pain in the stomach , sometimes there might not be any pain .
important information connected to antibiotic .
do not need to sppit again and again , you do not clear you throat again and again , if there is no foul smell in sweat and excreta then you are healthy .
inner fever ( Typhoid ) - Treatment - In this fever one should drink hundred grams to one hundred and fifty grams green water Sun charged by the medium of Sun rays and color therapy four to five times a day on an empty stomach .
in case of the barrenness arising out of mental excitement one should use &apos; Aaram-met-200 &apos; once a day .
the following problems and complexities can emerge from diabetes .
one hand handles the needle of phaco machine , the other hand fills cataract in this needle by the instrument .
black pepper has been considered to be very beneficial in Ayurveda .
who is not familiar with the green fragrant leaves of mint .
you must use mosquito nets or anti-mosquito incense sticks while sleeping .
Weiss has said that the therapy that makes one quit drug addiction is not much effective but from consumption of cocE for a long time patient gradually reduces the consumption of cocaine himself .
breast feeding mothers should pay attention .
muscular weakness , tiredness and negative thinking is removed by savasana .
the deficiency of food materials rich in Vitamin , the reduction of the quantity of Vitamin A accumulated in the body are the chief causes of xerophthalmia .
ipecac . : patient has difficulty even moving around .
Indian gooseberry is the only such fruit in which vitamin C does not end on drying , boiling and cooking but also stays safe in a good amount .
do not do any abstinence in the case of food .
attempt should be made to straighten such deformed feet as soon as possible because the bones and joints of children are soft .
in cold season limited and appropriate use of fat is important .
poverty and lack of purchasing power are chief reasons for malnutrition of a large section of population of our country .
the computer which plays chess made by Dr Hans Berliner selects the most suitable move from 175000 moves on analyzing them in just 1 second .
to what extent is milk essential for the child , this depends on the growth of the child .
it would have happened with you that some name might have been there in your mind but that does not come to your tongue .
you feel the coldness of winter else dampness shows its effect .
on the whole either the pregnancy does not stay in women suffering from tumor or even if it stays then many more complications occur during pregnancy .
initially it is not possible to be focussed and mind of the one who is exercising wanders , so one should try to focus .
the doctors treat by balancing various tastes .
which also conditions hair along with cleansing .
now grinding these ashes mixing a little roasted suhaga and vanshlochan and by licking 1 ratti medicine twice or thrice a day on mixing honey there is much benefit in whooping cough .
the patient faces restlessness and fever .
the Sun God himself gives the juice in the fruits .
in 2007 1,389 cases were registered in the whole world out of which 864 cases were found in India .
possibly headache is the most common in all complaints but it is an extremely difficult task to define it .
in the beginning there is a redness in skin which remains even after pressing .
good health is ultimate bliss .
to give a new flavor to dosa mix few fenugreek seeds in its mixture .
mix pieces of grapes and pomegranate in salad .
these games benefit slowly and at micro level now it depends on you which game you like .
you can do katisnan / waist bath many times .
attack of consumption occurs mainly on lungs only .
those who have the cancer or tumor of liver .
people afflicted with psoraisis themselves experience hesitation about their appearance and they feel a drop in their image from fear of going in front of people and mental anxieties .
not only this pain occurring from bleeding also heals in four to six hours .
neuropathy disease affects the main organs in an unequal way .
it happens at that time when blood circulation in arteries reduces .
because of the pregnancy in young age girls become physically and mentally weak .
the origin of anger is teeth .
by this people can keep their family happy .
in case of vaginal inflammation because of gonorrhoea one should take sipia-200 twice a week .
in such situation it becomes a difficult task for them to get rid of obesity .
eat food chewing well and allow it to digest well .
normally 15 to 45 years of age is such an age - group in women in which they can get pregnant .
disease stays till three to four weeks .
the biggest benefit of organic food products is this that no type of chemical substances can be used in them .
on increase of fatness , weight and belly there is too much weight on life support heart .
smoking absorbs the precious moisture of skin because of which wrinkles form before time .
every type of hepatitis is different .
nor have I had cold on change of season .
anything altered on eyes has direct impact on kidney .
while going out in sun , swimming or in the field of sports , make use of sun - protection cream .
according to ayurveda , mustard is fat containing , bitter and spicy , phlegm destroying , bile producing , depression removing , excitement giving to uterus and heart , stomach worms and leprosy removing , itch destroying and freshness giving .
one should massage the lower portion of the eyes ( eye socket ) .
similarly 4 more emanate from pons mid-brain .
always keep sunscreen lotion in your purse .
there is no real treatment for yellow fever .
after death can body parts be taken out in home ?
it is considered a contemptible disease because on making patient ugly it makes flies hover over him .
but gradually pills stop showing effect .
keeping soft leaves of bananas in a clay pot , make ashes by cooking on fire with mouth closed .
on getting nazla / catarrh once it does noy end easily .
for this this situation causes a lot of benefit in stopping the water easily .
you should drink its water also .
according to Unani physicians there is definitely a disorder of two qualities in kaifiyat araba .
many times women living especially in villages , slums , hutments , chawls , eat medicine on their own , do domestic treatment , which many times proves fatal .
in it pap is smeared after being taken from uterus .
besides this keep thin pieces of raw potato on the eyes three-four times a day .
there is relief in breathing by this massage .
those children who become scared more than usual when separated from there mother even for short while , become victim of phobia later on .
in the matter of women smoking in the top twenty countries of the world after America and China India is at the third place .
staying in sun for more than ten minutes could be dangerous .
I said my son to switch off the T . . and study then he became angry .
its amount of hemoglobin should be more than 12 . gram .
this way one could repeat for 3 to 6 times .
many people whose hair is curly have a complaint that their hair grow very less in length .
in the pain of neck attention should be paid on the right posture of sitting and sleeping .
ipecac is also an excellent medicine for malaria .
when pus starts forming then the central tip of the pimple looks yellow and rise in pain and swelling starts occurring .
there should be a distance of about 1 foot between the legs .
in winters if you take jaggery and lemon dissolved in a little lukewarm water then not only will it fix your digestion rather it will also be helpful in cleansing your skin .
then it effects heart more than body , but for such people noew tehre is good news is this that now it &apos; s cure is possible .
the weight of brain of our closest relative , monkeys , is just half a kilogram .
so it is necessary that you set a goal for improvement of your health .
if because of diabetes you have disease of kidneys , heart or eyes .
worms ( germs ) that suck blood sticking in the intestines are called antrakrim / hook worm .
remove the irritation of the throat and cure the cough through safe treatment .
in trichiasis disease eye lashes turn inside towards the eyes .
to prevent hyper pigmentation maintain caution somewhat this way .
which is calles piso electric effect and this effect became the base of USG .
one should stop the use of substances fried of oil - ghee , etc grease and should not eat anything other than hot water for 12 hours .
to increase your immunity definitely include seasonal fruits like papaya , pumpkin , guava , spinach , carrot , tomato .
utkatasana treats piles .
Calcaria carb - 30 : complete development of bones is unable to take place .
one gets relief in the ligament pain by doing this for some days .
keep on telling her how do you feel .
therefore it is important that do not let the water accumulate near your house and give full attention to its drainage .
therefore women are advised to maintain a higher HDL cholestrol level in comparison to the men .
there is not even moisturising glands in the skin below the eyes .
if the body is to be thinned , then the medicine should be taken before meal .
do polluted atmosphere , cigarette smoke , lack of nutrition in diet , tension etc . increase tension ?
taking note of seriousness of disorder you can suffer from slight discomfiture to extreme stomach ache .
patient should not bathe with soap because skin gets drier due to caustic soda .
but just on reaching the level of cerebrum we become awake .
because of holding your urine for long time Instead of sitting on the seat of a dirty toilet can cause more harm to your health .
we will check the eye nerves with special lens or equipment to find how much of damage has occurred .
patient thinks his / her weight to be too much even on being very weak .
according to scientists cocaine esterase is found from the natural form of &apos; cocE &apos; .
the medicines of homeopathy is obtained from many sources .
specific compilation has been made in Artha Veda of treatment with medicinal herbs / medicinal plants .
the weight of the person donating blood should not be less than 45 kgs .
blood or else pus may also come in urine .
in water deficiency these toxins show their complete effect when they get accumulated in the liver .
therefore patients often go for examination to doctor . . . specialist or orthopaedician .
when the tumor grows pain develops in it and then on showing to the doctor it is found out that the tumor is of cancer .
the use of bypass surgery in the treatment of heart diseases is not very old .
to prevent it one should start using winter body lotion as soon as the season changes .
cancer of gall bladder can be fatal .
you being chosen for plasma donation depends on your being present there , the condition of the vessels of your blood , hemoglobin and blood group .
the food should be according to the weather .
in urine infection urine comes with obstruction and burning sensation .
exercising is my hobby .
patient feels weakness .
while working in the parlor from use of gloves by the beautician danger of spreading of infection is absent .
by drinking the soft leaves of guava after grinding in water like sherbet one is benefitted in the disease of gall bladder .
when gas starts reaching the brain rising upwards then makes the patient very anxious .
T . . . . . . . . and T . . . . there is no similarity in results in treatment through all three , that is why all are not popular together in these .
to make tasty and nutritious salad take fresh things that are for making salad .
while coming back place the legs slowly on the ground , not with a jerk .
on the basis of the nature of the disease , the availability of the related medicine and its process of effect the doctor prescribes the patient to take pills , injection and syrup according to the need .
to protect an infant from cold one should wrap cotton on his chest and keep .
child can get seriously ill on not getting diagnosis or treatment on time or child can lose life .
staying faithful to one &apos; s partner / keeping productive organs clean .
there can also be many other symptoms of this disease .
in our spine between every two vertebra there is a thin , flexible membrane or cushion which is called an inter-vertebra disc .
tea , is even more harmful than alcohol .
besides this humans should not take anything in their diet by oneself which is not necessary .
incisional hernia . large population has to cross small surgical process of the stomach .
this medicine is specifically used for rheumatism and gout .
especially in keeping the level of cholesterol regulated black pepper is said to be helpful .
Vaatanashak because of being sour , kaphanashak because of being bitter , pittanashak because of sweet juice .
he also drinks mint tea because it is beneficial in reducing weight .
according to experts until 7 months are over one should get tests done every month and after that one should get test done every two weeks for eight and a half months other than this if there is any kind of complain then one can take consult the doctor .
other than this by drinking fresh Indian gooseberry juice thrice a day having powder of Indian gooseberry with milk there is extreme benefit in heart disease .
in one condition after lying flat and leaving the abdomen region loose both the knees are folded upwards .
in the initial stage this disease stays painless .
there is quick benefit in suda harr by eating 9 masha atariphal ustukhudoos with 10 tola arq gulab .
patient feels restlessness and nervousness .
one gets relief in old cough , asthma , pneumonia etc by massaging the red oil of sun-charged sesame on the chest and the back .
patient should himself take such light and easily digestible food by which disorder of constipation does not occur .
the cancer of the skin of the reproductive organs is different from the cancer of skin of other organs .
cause . Haematuria occurs from expansion of prostate gland because of black water fever , typhoid , yellow fever , typhus , yellow fever cancer , stones , etc , accumulation of blood in kidney because of rupture of urinary bladder or nerve from getting an injury , inserting needle through urinary bladder negligently , etc .
it is important to take complete precautions to keep the body balanced and keep oneself from slipping in the bathroom .
there is one more domestic idea of reducing the oil of skin . after mixing one pinch of biocarbonate soda in cold water sprinkle on face and leave face as it is .
by gargling with salt water and applying powder of catechu - turmeric bleeding of fallen tooth stops .
by eating with chutney , pickle and papad interest in meal increases but its excess produces disease .
rejection from accepting that he has any psychological disease .
according to the popular beauty specialist Dr . Blossom Kochar , one using this therapy for more than 25 years , essence is extracted from things obtained from plants and trees , leaves , roots , bark , fruits and flowers , vegetables , spices , etc . which is called essential oil .
for this there is benefit from giving calcium chloride , lead acetate ( 5 grain ) or lactate ( 20 grains thrice a day ) .
after this those bottles should be properly closed by putting on the cap .
what happens on donating plasma .
thus , naru disease is generally found more in rural population .
the biggest identification of fever azamiya meaning malaria fever is the production of fever by cold .
for the health of a person it is necessary for his blood pressure to be normal .
spare some such time during the day when you think only about yourself and focus on this thing that in the whole day what and how much you have done for your pleasure and satisfaction .
a doctor can find out about the disease by inserting gloved finger in the rectum .
smokers also become victims of death suddenly on getting a stroke , this is often seen more in young people .
other than this teething of milk teeth that stay for a long time according to planning is also one way .
if there is much pain , redness in eyes , photophobia is there of water / matter then go to your eye specialist as soon as possible because it &apos; s appropriate treatment at the right itme is very important .
if there is pain in the back because of air pressure then massage on the back below the nck with the sun-charged red sesame oil prepared through the medium of sun rays and chromotherapy .
more than required lengthy pain may be dangerous .
the amount of work which the coronary arteries do for the heart and body then it is correct for it to be decorated with a crown .
if you want to remain healthy then before having your food first see how much is the quantity of the cholestrol and the fat .
modern medicine methods have done some such treatment inventories , by which the unwanted hair on eyebrow , upper lips , chin , forehead can be removed on a permanent basis , that too without pain .
the sound having frequency more than this is called &apos; ultrasound &apos; .
eat pulses ( 2 . bowls ) , khichdi , porridge , rice , potatoes , sago porridge , sweet potatoes , rice puffs .
knee pain always occurs in only those people whose body is epecially heavy .
if there is pain the back then do not touch the nostrils with the knee by lifting up the head .
stiffness in body .
by eating the pieces of watermelon after sprinkling black pepper powder , sea and black salt acvidity get stopped .
even after getting inside the comforter feet get warm at midnight .
give the child mashed things in food like mashed roti , dalia , mashed fruits and vegetables .
if there is an indoor pool close to home then you can swim there .
the various parts of body become white because of bers .
breast feeding is not just a life saving elixir but it is also a life savior for the mother .
are they really natural .
small scale and extensive work is being done at primary health centres and community health centres and district hospital in which delivery room , construction of operation theater , water fulfilment and electrical services are included .
because the food is quickly digested by it and there is formation of pure blood .
henna can be applied on hair .
for the cleanliness and beauty of our face , forehead , neck and hands we should use sandalwood , gram flour , curd , lemon juice .
though it is a light and mild medicine it can still produce irritability .
where making estimation of the disease is difficult there advice is given to get ultrasound or CAT scan done .
after that he remained alive for few months .
this can be felt in the length of nerve and it appears for small periods .
along with hiding a different kind of aroma in itself bay leaf is also a source of vitamin &apos; A &apos; and vitamin &apos; C &apos; .
heavy hips and thighs are alright but heavy stomach dangerous .
the use of various types of chemicals on plants and cereals produce many types of dangerous diseases after reaching in our body .
sometimes this discharge becomes wound on increasing and foul smell also starts coming out of it .
their this oblivionness if for a longer time can make them blind forever .
on deep sleep at night body is healthy and stress less .
and made Muniya drink after every dysentery .
in scorching heat it becomes extremely difficult to remain fresh .
when should you avoid enema .
there are qualities in the morning sunshine of increasing the immune power , therefore do sit at least five minutes in the sunshine .
for the diagnosis of insipient diabetic nephropathy ratio of albumin and retaining is detected in urine .
in medicines potash , bromide , tincture belladonna , arsenic , quinine , belleriun , zinc , etc are beneficial .
he said , if we become successful in using this new technique , then we can interfere in the formation process of biophils and the infection occurring due to biophils could be treated .
keep an eye on color of fingers also .
in the state of jaundice one can be saved from this situation by giving blood to the child as soon as possible .
often in a condition of rest also hands - feet remain in a state of tremors whereas while working and on application of pressure these tremors decrease .
the child acquires skill in sports and entertaining activities as well .
you should make one abstain from making the child urinate before sleeping , not giving water before sleeping , meat , vinegar , chutney .
because of the use of denazol also masculine chracteristics appear in the girl child .
these pictures could be dynamic or static .
in the developing countries the deficiency of Vitamin A has been identified as a chief problem occurring due to the deficiency of nutrition and control over it can be achieved .
in the program of national prevention of disease against the blindness occurring due to deficiency of Vitamin A it is important to make the working staff of program more aware together with immense cooperation of the people of the community .
this problem can occur due to any one or many of the reasons like congenital reasons , due to increasing age , as a result of surgery , strain in muscles during pregnancy , reducing weight fast for decreasing obesity , diseases like marfan syndrome etc .
then massage the hands-legs , chest , back , neck and face of the child .
this water staying in intestine brings help in thinning and expelling stool .
if that day there is union of egg with the sperm of male then the woman will get pregnant .
with the cooing of the child the atmosphere of the entire household becomes happy , but if the child falls sick , then the entire house becomes tensed .
the computer will start working according to the instruction and it will continue working till the time we do not switch that off .
anthocyanin is a kind of antioxident .
you took a little rest and then forgot it , but not this that this symptom is pointing towards the deficiency of iron .
escape from staying awake at night because body needs sleep .
do gardening , pet animals and take care of them , do stitching - sewing , etc .
if you have trouble in going to watch a film or shopping out of fear of urine passage then you are not alone .
someone who has really won over disappointment only he can laugh whole heartedly .
success has been achieved in growing teeth by stem cell of All India Institute of Medical Sciences .
pneumonia disease usually stays till 5 to 7 days .
sonography through abdomen or vagina ( transabdominal and transvaginal ) .
nowadays no matter much one saves oneself from adulteration of food somewhere or the other someday or the other colored and chemical containing food does enter the meal .
there should be a difference of at least three years between two children .
cause . Catarrhal Pneumonia is a pneumonia that usually happens in children of up to three years of age .
iron elements are found in high quantity in green leafy vegetables and lentils .
otherwise on the heart being disease infested he comes in the clutches of many types of heart related diseases .
the main medicine of this disease is morphine or opium .
it is stated in another study that women suffering from ophthalmic problems such as dry eye syndrome can decrease this problem up to 68 percent by eating tuna fish .
let your skin breathe completely .
in this impulses of heart are heard more towards the lower side than their natural place .
this bacteria together with making the disease of the patient serious also become the cause of the delay of the cure .
Burping or hiccup is that process in which nitrogen , oxygen , carbon dioxide ( which is swallowed along with the air etc ) exit from the abdomen .
in order to escape from such diseases it is important that we learn to strike balance between our body and mind - brain .
there is a danger of the occurrence of osteoporosis in the female child if the bone of the mother or the maternal grandmother of the child has got damaged in any accident occurring after the age of forty years .
doing Uttanapadasana with each leg respectively is especially beneficial in the backache .
the microbes which do not die immediately , they become inactive on sticking with the mucous .
by the consumption of ammonium carb , anscenic , antim tart , hepar sulph , pulsatilla , nux vomica etc in homeopathic medicines on the advice of any doctor chronic bronchitis can be removed completely .
straining Indian gooseberry mix honey in it at dawn .
the more the use of modern synthetic medicines is increasing the more outbreak of allergy is going on increasing .
in the disease of muscular rheumatism the symproms of pain in muscles etc symptoms are found .
having stress in the fast life of today is a common thing but removing it is also easy .
yes care of eyes is equally important as that of other body parts .
in virus infection of pneumonia may occur because of chicken pox flu and legionnaire disease , etc .
nothing has happened to the muscles , not even to the motor cortex .
there is provision to give consciousness awakening training to the workers from the level of civil centres to rural level .
being slim is the symbol of being healthy .
lifting he right hand fold it towards the back and bringing the left hand from behind the back hold the right hand .
its smell is also very strong .
in the ancient age in Greece alonwith being offered to the God it was also given even in tax and ransom .
because of this reason there is itching around the vagina and the quantity of calcium starts decreasing in the body .
who has the discharge of blood from the vagina without any reason .
because of all these reasons hands - feet feel numb .
gargle twice or thrice at one time .
this fact came to the fore from a study done on women going through the pre - menopause condition and women having already attained menopause .
safe cure for wart or kinak is only that you should consult a therapist .
take medicines on time and on a regular basis .
aedes Aegypti mosquito spreads yellow fever mainly in the urban regions by communicating virus from one person to the body of another person .
if throat also comes in grip of this virus then itching , pain and dry cough occur in throat .
as the cells of the inner skin of the ears become old , they continue to bring the wax-like materials outside .
lens is fitted in the capsular bag .
rubella virus is main in infection .
on temperature becoming less than 30 degrees skin goes blue .
by eating atariphal mulayyin in quantity of 1 masha with water constipation ends .
burning sensation arises because of getting rubbed against tight pant , panties or stitching of nylon underwear .
one bowl of chicken soup is not only for the mental health but also beneficial for our health .
actually chemicles are used in holi colors with which itching or pimples can come .
well in the desire to look beautiful thousands of products are being used .
Vitamin A rich food like lettuce , carrot and sweet potato etc . are also important .
whether a vegetable or a chutney its taste improves with bay leaf only .
for patients of high blood pressure also eating apple is beneficial .
it is very cheap and it can be mixed with extremely exotic oils .
in the seventh month every month in the year do consult the doctor so that in the upbringing of the ones child there is no lack mother .
Detoxification of descending colon through enema and diet - change these two are the main foundation pillars of natural therapy .
due to the reasons of the newest technique of medical science removal of blood clots now has become very easy .
at the onset of malaria fever get the patient &apos; s blood tested .
the results of this research are published in the fresh issue of &apos; Cell Stem Cell &apos; journal .
you can go to work immediately after blood donation .
according to a survey 45 to 50 percent decrease occurs because of seat belt in deaths occurring from chest injury in road accidents .
exercising regularly and reducing the excessive weight of the body could be a good beginning towards the prevention of GERD disease .
it is an innocent medicine without any side - effects and it is used in heart diseases again and again .
its usually in both lungs .
the studies have told that the possibility of ulcer increases by smoking .
dry and wet cough persists in its patient at all times .
this condition is appropriate for diseases like typhoid , cholera .
repeat it from ten to as per strength 25 to 30 times .
drink the juice of carrot , tomato , orange or mix vegetables in winter .
for children of up to 7 to 12 years - one to two eggs , 2-3 ounce meat or fish etc .
apply this ointment in deep wounds of navasir making a wick .
copper T 380 A - this may be put for ten years .
by these cautions you can keep yourself safe from the adverse effects of diabetes .
the stink of shit and fart gets removed , diarrhoea gets stopped , the digestive fire becomes stronger and stools stop coming again and again .
the way throat dries up in water deficiency each one definitely feels it sometime or the other .
hunger increases by sun-warmed orange water .
Otic flow mainly occurs mainly because of infection of middle ear and outer ear infection .
do you know that coconut is the most useful fruit of nature .
its maximum benefit would be in Orissa , West Bengal along with the people living in other coastal regions of the country and on international level Africa , Australia and people residing in the coastal areas in other countries , because the number of cases registered here is maximum .
they are used for maintaining the moisture and nutrition of skin .
according to old books of Unani tibb disease of bers can occur because of fasade dum ( defect in blood ) , zoke hazam ( disorder of cough ) , didan ( worms of stomach ) .
this fruit has a unique taste with a very soft texture .
it is beneficial to do the exercise ( isotonic , isometric exercise , retrograde quadriceps , etc . ) of knees on a regular basis .
out of these unsaturated fat only should be given to the children in large quantities .
ask everyone in the house especially children to wash their hands again and again with soap and water .
also there is a hereditary pattern in the rate of increase in length of hair .
take about one ounce of fresh Indian gooseberry .
malaria is an omnipresent problem .
the former American foreign minister Condoleeza Rice got the treatment of fibroid done by the technique of artery embolization .
our way of living , where we go , eating habits and dressing , everything changed according to the new age .
among the main reasons of GERD unstable lower oesophigial sphincter relaxation , reduced LED resting tone , ineffective oesophigial clearance in the emptying of abdomen and deficiency in the production saliva are included .
in that duration of staying in hospital it is natural to get relief .
he says that on walking around and roaming about in this condition ball in the socket starts snagging hence one feels a cramp and pain whereas in a healthy condition of the hip ball rotates easily .
if there is infection in the nails then smear the nails with myrobalan powder soaked in water .
the main symptoms of Hepatitis B .
the waist area becomes flexible by trikonasana .
avocado , almond , wheat germ , jojoba , peach are good for the treatment of dry skin .
these germs get transferred from the ill men-women to healthy men-women .
as a result of the comprehensive mission for the eradication of polio in 1998 the number of new cases in the whole country has only been 1934 .
in many food stores one gets organic extracts which is nutritious .
CD-4 cells help protect the body from different diseases .
it is considered an excellent antioxidant .
by consuming honey and ghee , curd and ghee , etc things together there can be production of bers .
when a fourth of it remains keep it after cooling .
in general term this disease schizophrenia is also called madness .
nobody has ever invited me for blood donation .
fluoride makes teeth stronger and also prevents deformities .
patients perspires .
in some special circumstances bathing benefits by removing the reason behind the disease .
sunshine is disinfectent .
normal or special USG save the patients many times from the difficulties of surgery .
you must definitely be wondering that after all how is virtual aroma produced .
there is no desire to do anything by getting cold .
in cereals iron elements are found in wheat , jowar , bajra , pulses with peels and jaggery .
how many times has the patient become pregnant .
third stage - speaking words with difficulty , not recognizing family members , friends and close relatives , complete dependence on others , absolute no control on excretion , increase of sleep disorders , incompetence of getting up and sitting , comma at the end .
disease producing heart disease in children is &apos; rheumatic heart disease &apos; .
date has vitamins and mineral salt to increase the immune power , it gives us immense calories .
for its treatment there are good results by massaging or applying the five-seven drops of blue coconut oil prepared in blue bottle by sun rays and chromotherapy or sun-charged almond mdicine on the head and the palate slowly by tip of the hands for ten-fifteen minutes .
in such situation it is essential to keep the eyes clean .
the cancer of the skin of the genitals is different from the cancer of the skin of the other organs .
if there are worms in the stomach then by consuming 20 grams juice of raw papaya morning - evening regularly one will get benefitted .
during the time of Holi injuries due to water ballons are normal and usually they are serious .
for the purpose of reducing weight important it is to abstain from fatty substances .
in modern times Karl Deresy is considered to be the genitor of contraceptive pills .
if the seven elements maintaining the body juice , blood , flesh , fat , skeleton , marrow and virility are in appropriate ratio then that person is healthy .
in dementia the person is forced to behave like children .
thyroid glands are of the shape of the shield and they are situated in the throat on the both sides of the trachea .
exercise and yoga also prove to be very advantageous .
flow of water from nose , tears after eyes getting wet , heaviness of head and continuous sneezing are main symptoms of hay fever .
those who are more than the age of 40 years of age and smokes cigarette a lot .
do not let any thought come into the mind and keep the concentration on the ajna chakra only .
however , such symptoms erupts not just because of cancer , there can be other reasons as well for these .
do not exercise when you are sad , in tension or angry .
in the same manner there is place of backbone or spine in the body .
if the big vein of this fallopian machinery gets torn then blood begins to come in large quantity .
later water starts secreting from it too .
ferrum phos . x : one should give this medicine to children in kaanch nikalna .
normally this condition produces irritability .
after this secretion stops forever .
you have had cold and fever ( whose reason you do not know ) .
usually it is believed that by exercise of less intensity like aerobics body fat reduces fastly , but according to American Heart Association exercise of high or medium intensity are more successful in reducing the quantity of body fat .
on not getting a complete treatment of zukam there can also be bronchitis , cough and asthma .
it has to be taken within five to minutes after the meals .
if filling with soil is not possible , spray kerosene oil etc . in the ditch .
after this roll the thumb and make a fist like structure by pressing it with the fingers then open it slowly .
in the disease of schizophrenia the person starts living in unreal and fictitious world leaving his real life .
boil ten-fifteen buds or five-seven laves of neem with garlic .
if giving water then give the water to drink on cooling after boiling it .
the partner plan is the form of proposal .
patient gets very little urine .
if there is inconvenience in stopping enema water then before taking enema itself give a hot - cold compress to stomach for 10 - 15 minutes .
clothes and bedcovers , etc . of patient should be washed in hot water with soap .
according to symptoms medicine of disease is as follows .
ulcer in stomach - You should drink Sun charged water of green colored bottle prepared by the medium of Sun rays and color therapy thrice a day half an hour before breakfast , lunch and dinner on an empty stomach up to amount of hundred to two hundred grams .
should sleep left side and flat on the back .
on situation worsening often medicine to appease hunger is also given .
it is known that because of the increase of the cases of polio in India , it has to face criticism from those countries of the world who have eradicated the disease of polio within them .
start exercises three months after operation to keep muscles of stomach healthy .
Calcaria phos - 3x , 30 : if bone of such a patient breaks then it does not join easily .
out of seven childbirths completing outside the medical institutions only one childbirth ( 14 percent ) is benefitted with post-labour tests within two months .
by applying on eyes on grinding Bhimseni camphor / Borneo - camphor in milk of woman with a boy cataract goes away .
sun might well be less in winters but there is not much decrease in its sharpness .
in Panwali , Sahastratal , Ganga , etc in Bhilangana Ghats Salam Mishri is found .
the best thing is that there is no big surgery for T . . .
because of monsoon depression we do n &apos;t like anything .
if there is backache then dwickrikasana is beneficial even when done with one leg .
in most of the patients the part of the water channel from the eyes are open yet for some reasons the water gets lessened .
in the dysentery as well , when teeth comes out in small kids give one pinch of it .
on the removal of infection by injuring that empty place with machine they take out blood from there .
if the person will get the treatment done and do not quit the habits leading to disease , then is its treatment possible ?
with the division in the CD-4 cells many viruses enter into the blood-circulation .
because there is more nutrition in their outer cover ( skin ) .
for example cancer ( abdominal ) , the diseases of the liver , diseases related to the intestine etc .
keep your feet clean especially when your feet are dry .
it has some warning signals like restlessness , mental frustration , sneeze and feeling of suffocation .
the clean and balanced with all nutrients and healthy food should be such that it contains protein , mineral salt and vitamin in sufficient quantity .
if feet will be warm then blood circulation will remain constant in them .
when the abscess blasts then as a result its pus creates several fatal diseases on entering lungs , stomach , large intestine , peritoneum and pericardium .
in the whole world there is a situation of illusion regarding the patients and the symptoms of SARS .
take tea , coffee , etc in absolutely limited amount .
before breakfast , before lunch , two hours after meals and one at 3 in the morning .
patient feels pain in the place of kidneys on there being sediment in urine .
if there is balanced meal , pure thought , anxiety free life to obtain health gem then you can gain a long life .
the sesame oil is sun-charged in the rd color .
participate in dancing or water aerobics .
in youth the physical and mental growth occur very fast .
do not have water or any other drink with food .
they inform us that if &apos; multifocal IOL &apos; of patient is done with &apos; fecoemulsification &apos; then one does not need to wear glasses after surgery .
use this vanaspati that is produced in 4 . varieties is made in many medicines .
if signs of under mentioned symptoms become visible then immediately go to hospital or health center .
on a wound or injury apply coconut after grinding it fine and mixing turmeric in it .
sleep keeping a pillow directly below the womb so that difficulty is lesser .
Radiopack elements or dye is used in angiogram , so that blood vessels could be seen easily by x - ray .
Dr . Charu Tua , chief dietician , Pushpanjali Crosslay Hospital , New Delhi opines that take your mind towards those works which would give you a similar feeling of instant satisfaction .
in women of 35 years or older the problem of blood loss thorugh uterus appears .
consume pure fresh vegetarian food and water .
this is believed that fungal infection formed on skin may also be a cause of dandruff .
you would have heard about angiography in the context of heart diseases , but do you know under what conditions is angiography done ?
there is difficulty in breathing .
one patient of tuberculosis in whose expectoration tuberculosis bacteria are present is spreading the disease every year in 10 to 15 new people .
by breathing deeply entrance of water inside is facilitated .
urine also comes out viscous .
the child soon gets bored with useless work .
pain persists in spot of kidney .
keep taking Sun charged green water and Sun charged orange water repaired by the medium of Sun rays and color therapy up to hundred grams to fifty grams mixing in equal in amounts three to four times a day .
at the same time you get fever and patient may feel weakness .
because of today &apos; s modern life style our natural energy is used less .
finding about the mothers with anemia and treating them .
sometimes stool comes out on its own .
slimming and counter effect is also there .
heart is a body part made up of elastic muscles extremely delicate , like a red-coloured bag , with four fragments .
for some people it is not right because due to henna hair become thick and dry .
the symptoms of the disease of filaria are high fever , swelling in the vessels of hand and feet , pain and growth of glands , swelling in hand-feet and genitals etc .
on occurrence of ratab patient gets many sneezes and eyes water continuously .
the decided dose of Vitamin A is as follows .
but after taking hormone therapy the size may increase again .
their effect is not just physical , they affect those muscles which stabilise the of eyes in socket and they also have psychosomatic benefit which help the brain stay relaxed while reacting towards outer stimulants .
then such a patient becomes a victim of this disease in fog else rainy season .
apart from irritation there are many symptoms of this disease .
it is necessary to give special attention towards the formation of acid-accumulation in the patient &apos; s body .
teeth also start shaking on weakening .
the submucos fibroid can also be removed with laser .
take full precaution even after delivery .
lakhs of sperms enter the uterus but maximum get destroyed due to the reason of the acidic substances inside .
if this habit of sucking thumb does not get over even by the age of four-five years then the case becomes serious .
Vitamin A is found in it .
the information of availability of nutritive substances at low price should be given to the families of children of this age group .
layer swells up because of this path of respiratory tract becomes narrow .
provides strength to bones also along with ligaments .
leave this ( paste applied on the forehead and nose of the child for the entire night .
they start given anaesthesia when cervix has open 2 to 4 centimetres .
by eating fish not only your skin , hair , brain remain healthy but eyes also sharpen .
why do we start yawning a little time before going top bed and immediately after getting up ?
through all these things the prevention of diseases may happen to a great extent .
he informs that one should bathe properly before waxing and should not apply any cream .
cerebellum does their fine adjustment with the voluntary actions .
due to the deformity of arunshika there is high damage to the skin of the head .
intense desire to take intoxicating substance .
the method of calling the violet flame is that pray to your god that send this divine light to you .
now insert your smooth finger in the anus of the girl and grapple by pressing the finger towards the front of the rectum .
when decay arises in them there is production of lakhs of germs and bacteria .
it can be that yawning also does the work of a psychological pressure - release .
complete treatment of asthma is done by Baksons Homeopathy in which chronic asthma is finished from its roots which is allergy .
consume complex carbohydrate rich substances less , because these substances digest late and produce the complications of constipation etc .
more serious problems occur because of excess of iron .
itching is a contagious disease , it gets transmitted from one person to another .
tongue dries up .
in such a condition we call biliary fever &apos; gib lazim &apos; .
the use of those swimming pools which are used by the patients H . . . / AIDS .
in the ancient times the methodology of looking at the nerve of the patients to detect their diseases by the doctors and and the hakims has remained quite popular .
some symptoms are such by which you can easily know that now it is essential to go to the doctor - like with left arm there is pain in your chest , you are feeling something like tumor in your breasts , feeling of excessive tiredness , staying in tension or more fits of anger has started coming .
there are many similarities and difficulties in SARS and other diseases .
instead of continuously standing at one place one should move the feet forward - backward , right - left at intervals .
these bones give strength and tightness to roots of teeth .
risks for diabetes .
together with the Indian Government , the WHO is also very effortful in this direction .
feed the infant child with your own milk for at least up to six months .
intestines feel sort of ground .
you have to do only this that first wet the toothbrush in hydrogen peroxide and before brushing dip it in baking soda .
nowadays people are spending half their lives in office .
make the child wear soft cotton clothes so that there is no allergy .
harms of high blood pressure .
if absorbed iron in intestines is in free form then its extremely harmful , it is insoluble and is unable to be used in body .
do you have the problem of losing breath on working hard ?
always keep in mind basics like head lift , dumbbell exercises , chins , squats and heavy bicep curls .
Guleria has told that they were asked that after donating kidney are they enjoying their life , do they have enough money to fulfil their needs and are they completely satisfied with their personal and physical relationships .
when bile in the bile vessels gets infected then there is production of fever after one day .
dermatologist Dr . Hema Pant says that problem of &apos; dermatitis &apos; is common these days .
Sanitary napkin , panty liners , tampon and feminine wash and wipes are easily available for private parts of women .
dysentery , diarrhoea are all diseases related to stomach .
the help of two principles is being taken in implementation of the national disease prevention program .
its potency below 200 potency or the potency more than this should not be used without thinking .
Phytolactus root extract . : wind fills up beneath chest .
similarly by increasing the pressure in blood vessels high blood pressure produces the stroke of heart .
during sports , jogging , tennis and skiing there is more activity .
cancer of prostrate is that which increases gradually .
patients of epilepsy and hypersensitive people should not use this medicine .
the sunscren with chemicals absorb the sunrays easily while the sunscreen without chemicals do not absorb the rays .
many people stay afflicted with insomnia .
shouting loudly while playing .
as a result , the problems related to common sense could occur in those taking these medicines .
as a result of this there is pessure on the digestive power .
cough - cold , viral septicemia .
if after this also the patient does n &apos;t get relief then medicine is given to reduce action of muscles of prostrate gland .
sometimes milk is produced in very less quantity in the chest of woman because of weakness or some other reason so that child does not get complete milk .
this acid rich smoke harms the lungs .
lavender , geranium and wlang - wlang are sebum balancing oils .
they are unable to control seeing a special food .
on applying contact lens for a long time amount of Oxygen in eyes reduces and contact lens becomes unbearble in a few years .
problem in desire or the process of copulation .
make nuclear life a bit social , because social like works as therapy .
by taking two spoons in a day there is relief in the fever .
after caring for the patient and after having touched his clothes or utensils wash your hands with hot water and soap .
because of the reason of polio the child has a lot of difficulty in bringing his knee to the mouth while sitting .
the vertebral column gets stiffened due to the occurrence of fever , vomiting , dysentery , restlessness , pain , injury in the layer of the brain .
straining at dawn wash eyes with that water itself .
shahika / whooping cough is the most painful disease that happens to children .
with the increase in the need for more surgery the danger for surgeons could also increase .
sometimes these symptoms meaning signatures not matching in bank , etc are the very initial symptoms of this disease .
this action should be should be done at least for three minutes to five minutes twice in a day for two or three days .
in this life of haste number of vehicles running on the roads is bound to grow .
but there was no significant change .
Fortunately , through eye donation by corneal transplant ( mediacl intervention ) usually lost vision can be regained .
when everything gets burnt then after filtering this oil and applying two - three times on the head arunshika is soon destroyed .
apply some cream or Vaseline on face .
Abrotanum - 30 : if stomach of patient has stiffened on distending .
state of relief : in this condition specially there are complaints of dysentery and loose motions .
because of eating habits the hair often falls .
in such case uncooked food remains for long in intestines and stomach then producing contaminated gas gives rise to meda .
gradually these children can become sensitive to dust , animal skin , fiber strands , hair , body waste etc . and on coming in contact with these asthma attack can occur .
the straight thing is that lack of proper management with respect to water is the root of all the diseases .
adenomyosis is such a disease of women to get rid of which their uterus itself is removed .
the people who retain a problem of eczema or itching or who are suffering from any other such problem which causes harm to the surface of skin , then there is fear of occurrence of boils to such people .
daily massage your skin with hydrating cream or moisturiser especially when the air is dry .
while the things of their need is available in the nature itself .
the smile of a second or one good laugh is capable of changing the direction of life .
in the entire world nearly 400 million ( 40 crore ) people are suffering with mental problems .
doing such is harming the child .
on production of imbalance in metabolic process new cells start forming rapidly because of which dead cells meaning dandruff start forming quickly .
otherwise via these needles also virus of infected person will go into a healthy person .
that also is similar to these diseases .
in this regard child birth education Divya Deswal makes clear . sometimes it is necessary to carry on the normal times while many times the women come outside while giving birth to the child in water .
honey has almost 75 % surcura in which fructose , glucose , sulphose , maltose , lactose etc are the main ones .
ginger is used for treatment of lethargy , fever , loss of appetite , tonsillitis , stomach ache , irritability from journey , soreness of throat , weakening of memory , lack of self esteem and confidence and digestion related disorders .
a great pain occurs in the joints in Chikungunya .
in such symptoms and the old disease of otis flow grapitis medicine is beneficial .
Radha had fed Muniya with her own milk from the first month her birth and up to four months she had not given her anything apart from her milk .
Calcaria ars . x : this is the best medicine on formation of blood clot in any part of body at all .
its first use was done for malnourished children and infected women , which was successful .
like bleeding during pregnancy or delivery .
it is a common disease occurring in winter days .
you wear thick clothes with which color is not touched on skin .
as a result of the bone breaking often deformity can occur in joints also .
then taking it off fire , straining , on being lukewarm mixing 2 tola sorbet banfasha and by making patient drink , zukam / cold produced due to cold or heat gets destroyed .
it also makes hair dense and healthy .
with this test many things become known beforehand only .
this medicine is mainly used for soreness in throat , asthma , cold , cough and flu .
abstain from sour , fried and roasted , hot and spicy substances .
hence can produce many problems later .
the patient starts hearing such voices which is audible only to him and not to others .
the unpleasant odourof flatulence comes by that bacteria which is situated in the large intestine and which produces such gas , which has sulphur .
do not let lack of water happen in summer .
temperature remains less .
now you will also not overlook jaggery and will include it in your daily meals .
in bacterial dysentery the body becomes weak after becoming skinny and fever starts developing .
in the suggested dose 100 mg quantity of alpha lipoic acid with food , 200 mg everyday can be taken by people suffering with diabetes .
baby cries .
first exercise if connected with heaviness or sensation of heaviness .
through counselling the misconception of having too much weight is taken out of mind of patient .
Colour of nails may remain red , complexion of feet pink and of skin also pink then you are healthy .
the sesame oil should be prepared by sun-charge in the glass bottle of red color .
increase the duration of exercise gradually .
you can eat majun with water also .
despite this body builders and athletes are not fat .
experts have claimed that if detected in the initial stage then chest cancer can be healed up to 95 percent .
asanas and pranayamas could be done in all conditions .
if the gas advances towards the chest then the patient &apos; s mind becomes restless and because of restlessness begins sweating and there is always the danger of heart-attack .
on becoming aware of the special symptoms of diseases like breast cancer they could be treated also , but lot of women do not take the symptoms of heart dieases seriously .
apply curd or egg for rough hair , leave it on for half an hour .
child birth is made easy and safe by taking simisifyuga-30 from 3-4 months before the delivery .
disease like rheumatoid arthritis is more distressing in winters .
or you can say that due to arrival of many kinds of contraceptives for women self-confidence has developed in them and they have started feeling themselves as free .
but now by VAT surgery it has become possible to treat these diseases very easily by cutting and ripping .
waist is thin , chest broad , stomach is not enlarged , chest is forward , stomach is at the back then you are healthy .
along with this treatment of Dialysis you should soak six black raisins and one or two dry figs making tiny pieces in water a day before in the evening .
first it separates the lips and the gums then a whitening gel is released in between .
Drowsiness begins to come .
on digestion of carbohydrate sugar reaches the liver in the form of glucose being absorbed by blood .
at night while sleeping do not forget to apply body cream on your hands , arms , feet and neck .
when passage of bile going from liver to intestine gets blocked then jaundice occurs .
immunity also stays , but there are some disease of every season , which is expressed with the ferocity of that season .
new swelling of wind pipe , acute bronchitis . polluted air , cold and infectious diseases like - are the main causes of this disease .
along with being a symbol of disorder of some other part sometimes it could be produced by trouble of eyes , sinus , teeth or neck .
ulcer ( wound ) in nafiz navasir occurs too far inside .
the operation done for treatment of inguinal hernia is most common .
all the tumors are not cancerous but showing precaution is important .
on there being a continual necessity of giving blood you need to give these injections for 3 . days slowly for 10 - 12 days .
the disease of measles can take a very serious form in developing countries because the death rate due to this is more than 10 percent .
physiotherapy is done in 3 ways .
take the pulp of watermelon and rub it on the area affected with &apos; black heads &apos; gradually .
according to studies if you remain in restlessness then the danger of your suffering from depression in the future becomes very less .
quantity of garlic becoming in excess by mistake or unknowingly burning sensation in eyes occurs .
grinding alum in arq of sulphur and hartal radish , applying on spots bers ends .
the sesame oil prepared in the sun-charged red bottle is stronger than evebn the fat of lion and also ayurvedic narayani oil .
you can take this lunch break between 12 to 1 .
the interior of the shoes should be soft .
age related point or spots ( A . . . . ) has become an important cause of blindness because number of aging old people has grown .
just as you take a bath you should cover with blanket etc .
along with it you also have greater danger of contracting osteoarthritis .
mind body communication takes place by laughing and one also gets happiness .
because of an amount of Potassium , Vitamin B6 , folic acid and the amount of soluble fibers being present banana is considered .
for settling its major symptom the ups and downs happening in the mood the use of mood stabilizer technique is done .
not being able to concentrate .
if it is required to bath immediately after the sun bath then bath with a little lukewarm water .
it has come forth in a report published in American journal of Epidemyology that the possibility of suffering from Perotid gland tumor in 50 percent more in excessive users of phone .
then after removing dirt clean with any antiseptic lotion and apply antibiotic cream .
take a drink with less alcohol .
music reduces stress and anxieties and increases positive thoughts .
Oin homeopathy the choice of medicine is done on the basis of symptoms and the constitution of patient .
for producing children indeed there is joint partnership of male and female .
in the same way do this with the second leg and then by bringing both the legs together .
those people who take excessive wine and beer and take a lot of nutritious food and do not exercise , their liver and kidneys are not able to work properly , they contract arthritis disease .
chikungunya is a long extending disease of the joints .
by ending constipation full effect of medicine takes place .
now for child your milk only is not enough .
it is a special medicine of diseases arising from an injury or wound .
all these are normal processes , which happen in our body absolutely everyday .
this is the very reason that problem of split hair also occurs .
most of the food materials which have carbohydrate could be the reason for gas .
if too many pimples have formed on face and have become very large then steam your face at night before sleeping .
in tracheitis some phlegm also comes and sometimes breath becomes abrupt .
by making drink little repeatedly the complaint of indigestion , nausea and intense thirst is removed .
after standing for 1 to 1 . hours knees on an average continuously you give knees rest of 5-10 minutes .
during this children may have common fever , cough , cold , coryza , etc which heals even without treatment but some children who are malnourished , are afflicted with some other serious disease or whose disease resistance capacity is weak , such a child needs treatment urgently .
for becoming tension free discussion may be done with any counsellor , but money is spent in that .
frothy loose motions of green color like pond water come .
but one thing you should always keep in mind , do not touch the root of the tooth .
Maharishi Charak tells about three types of diseases in sutrasthan of &apos; Charak Samhita &apos; . . Nij 2 . aagantu 3 . maanas .
sharp itching occurs .
it is difficult to clean the layer of turmeric on the wound and there is the danger of infection .
serum is like lotion .
because of these symptoms , since these symptoms are generally found in deliquium or hysteria , ignesia has got the status as a special medicine for deliquium .
diseases like weak digestion and weak-vision etc . may occur by taking bath with the hot water .
in around five minutes a clot is made from Thromboplastin present in blood .
heart disease is also hereditary meaning disease that is received in inheritance .
Antithyroid medicines like the medicines containing iodine ( first ) and first-2 should not be usd because first-2 can ge accumulated in the child &apos; s thyroid gland and there is a chance of the child contracting goitre .
Ulceration in rectum . constipation is said to be its main cause .
you should give patient diuretics ( those which help expel more urine ) medicines .
it is also beneficial for the weak and thin children .
in the exercise of neck sitting straight bring the neck first to the right shoulder by moving it towards the right side .
massage the forehead of the child till the eyebrows .
if your parents have Kanchbind then kanchbind can happen to you as well , you should get a check up done .
doctors treat the ulcer of abdomen and dudenum with the following medicines .
upper layer should be such that is successful in stopping water also with air .
this way while becoming mosquitoes from egg their enemy is gambusia fish which eats their eggs in the state of larva , pupa .
coconut oil absorbs into skin rapidly and makes it blooming and glowing from inside .
try that hair dries naturally only .
H . . . test is easy , safe and available at public health centres .
so this one should use this medicine .
the care of child has high importance .
easy way is this that divide this quantity into two parts .
it works to remove the cough from the lungs of the child .
always use fresh fruits and vegetables for extracting the juice .
in those patients who also have asthma along with pneumonia a whistling sound occurs from their lungs .
due to which child birth is done through surgery and not naturally .
use fresh fruit , juice , glucose and water during the journey .
if any woman feels that there was a mistake of some kind during physical intercourse and since she does not want a child then she can use these .
the complete practice of asana take place in one hour , medium practice in 30 minutes and brief practice in 15 minutes .
honey has a similar effect as sugar but it is not harmful for your health .
thus cleaning of the stomach , its being constipation-free , no indigestion , taking complete sleep by sleeping on time in the night and having proper meal is very necessary .
the child feeling more sleepy and difficulty in waking up .
sometimes because of the disbalance in this liquid material nausea begins .
in various patients the symptoms of this disease may be different .
wrong food produces more than expected indigestion .
then that person could present all the sciences by understanding them in very little time .
treatment of mental diseases can be done through the following methods .
the main organ of family welfare program is mass health , especially mother and child health , nutrition , environmental health etc .
it should in fact be said that in case of obesity India is slowly on path of America .
such jaundice which is born out of incomplete development of bone marrow .
the juice of salad leaves is cold and refreshing .
at present there is the custom of tea in all the houses .
enema of half to one pint of water .
you can detect the state of last 2 - 12 weeks of blood glucose by tests of fructosamine and HbA1C .
specific caution is required during treatment because there remains a chance of the body part degenerating in the plaster .
the aposinum medicine is fruitful in all types of swellings .
America is the largest exporter of this .
generally this question is a mystery for the consumers .
the simple way of inhaling vapor is that you sniff at handkerchief or paper napkin putting about 5 to 10 drops of essential oil in it .
no matter how good a hairtyle is made with the rough and lifeless hair , its flourishing results will not come to the fore .
tongue should be cleared after splitting daatun right from the middle , by rubbing them with each other .
these are in danger .
taking 6 grammes each of ahifen , elua mixing 2 grammes raisins in it ( seedless ) there is great benefit in navasir by grinding in gomutra or betel leaves .
although hernia can affect just any part of the body but the maximum cases are connected to belly or stomach .
its pleasant scent will spread all around and will start healing the disease .
aroma of chamomile , patchouli , orange , peppermint , jasmine , lavender , melissa removes insomnia and works as tonic for other disorders of nervous system .
these pills on going to the body of the female stop the female from conceiving .
in the suggested dose 100 to 200 mcg of selenium with food or even without food daily .
now instead of feeding the child two - three times a day feed him at least half bowl of food five - six times a day .
it has come forward in some works that because of problems in the medulla , prefrontal cortex and hippocampus such a situation happens .
enzymes are those elements , which are helpful in fastening the various chemical activities in the body .
sandalwood , neroli , wlang - wlang do fix the migraine also calms , balance and checks the nervous system specially .
if the cough continues for two to three months in a year , then it is considered to be chronic bronchitis .
not only of face but muscles of jaws , throat , stomach also work .
mandukasana is beneficial of heart diseases .
if the voice of the child is abnormal , heavier , or comes with obstruction then also it is essential to get it c hecked up .
after blood donation you will be given snacks .
they along with keeping the skin clean also nourishes them .
today &apos; s consumerism , tension and competitive life , wrong eating habits , lack of rest alone are the chief root of high blood pressure .
since consumption of energy begins as soon as one wakes up therefore it is important that one has a breakfast in such a way that to work there is no lack of energy until lunch .
for doing this very job in more refined way laser is also used .
pain in the bones , continuous fever , whether it is low or increasing by the evening , deformation of bones along with pain are the symptoms of tuberculosis .
even in urban areas more than half ( 56 percent ) of childbirths takes place at home .
jaundice occurs due to virus , which enters through the way of mouth .
take juice of fresh amlas around one ounce .
if there is a deformity in your feet , like there is corn or hammer-toe in feet .
every surgery has minor risks like bleeding , infection etc .
the permanent and temporary methods are used in family planning .
in comparison to the use of other oils , the use of coconut oil stops the hair fall by up to 16 % .
fear of weight gain in filled up inside like patients of anorexia and often has complaint regarding his / her weight and body shape .
or let us say that the spinal cord gets converted into brain .
more thirst and less hunger .
these can spread by consuming dirty water and polluted food materials .
mind it that in return to the eaten things you have done labor .
where light natural cosmetics increase the beauty of face there itself cheap chemical substances that we get in markets have an opposite effect on the beautiful delicate skin of our face .
the best way to get rid of depression is that one may not sit alone at home and as far as possible one may stay out more also one may take an interest in outside tasks .
consumption of high cholesterol is dangerous for heart patients .
the work of intelligence and construction is also finished in this period only .
kidney keeps control on blood pressure ( BP ) , makes many kinds of hormones which maintains water content in the body , the balance of acids and by which blood pressure remains normal .
water taken in small amount is immediately accepted by the gastric juice and gets mixed in it easily .
it is also its speciality that formation of much cough decreases by its consumption .
by drinking sorbete fasla mixing 4 tola water there is benefit in water deficiency and extreme thirst due to diarrhoea .
you are fat or whether you are fat or not , to know this it is important to know BMI or body mass index .
because of arthritis not just there is swelling and stiffness in the joints but several times redness is also seen in the joints .
you have had vaccination in the last 24 hours .
nutritious food , fresh air helps in stopping the leucorrhoea .
in leucorrhoea grind the sap of wood - apple kernel and mesua ferrea in equal quantites and sieve through cloth and take five gram of powder with rice water two or three times in a day .
do not hesitate at all in getting mammography done .
hence one can get successful joints related surgery done in months of January or June too .
according to beauty advisor Monica , 80 percent people face the problem of skin dryness in winters so do use night cream in this weather .
first of all give castor oil to the patient so that her intestines become clean .
nowadays because of the increasing interest towards beauty women of all ages have started arriving at the beauty parlor .
for general blind persons tools for threading a needle , for shorthand etc have also been developed .
he is careless while doing a task or playing ( because of which he is unable to concentrate ) .
in the third stage the tumor grows to five cm and spreads to the skin and muscles of the body but does not reach up to the neighbouring gland .
a strict control on the glucose level of diabetes patient is difficult because the danger of occurrence of hypoglycemia in them can increase by it .
go to a health club or a gym .
in case of vaginal inflammation because of injury use homeopathic medicin anirka-200 twice a week .
because of this there is also no threat of any scars remaining on stomach .
your support is expected in spreading .
left chest is pressed and released respectively 12 to 15 times in a minute and repeat it until the patient regains consciousness .
nutritive food is the mantra for good health .
those people who have mental depression and epilepsy they should shun sugar and products made up of sugar .
if complications arise in delivery then immediately she should be sent to such unit where the diagnosis and treatment of complications is possible .
still if harmless tumor persists in the body then be cautious of the following symptoms .
everybody liked the talks and with the help of institution and panchayat people completed these together .
without losing a moment make the pregnant woman reach the hospital .
by applying honey on a burnt place relief is felt , and blisters do n &apos;t occur .
in ayurveda the bark of this tree has been used in heart diseases since ancient times .
there the doctor will do the test for this complication and will immediately do its treatment .
so that the marital bliss is also maintained and they could also get information regarding the right time of pregnancy .
in order to prevent dengue do not accumulate water in water cooler , open tanks on the roof top , wasted empty tin bottles , vases , empty bottles / money plant bottles and cisterns .
by laughing the benefit of exercise is also obtained .
big crowd of audience get surrounded near him and people ask for favors from him .
where is selenium found ?
due to contact with machines we have also understood this that for understanding the complexities of any big instrument in a better way we should first make its small and simple model .
the getting of Vitamin A should be ascertained right from the time of birth .
after some days the child is forced to stay lying on the bed .
after the operation done by the telescope method , the patients have to live in the hospital for less time and the patient gets well quite soon .
gynaecologist and laparoscopic surgeon of Trinity Health Care Centre Dr . Nikita Trehan says , it is an object of social embarrassment for many women .
similarly if there is an acne problem then it has been seen for certain that they are found only in oily skin .
they are total seven brothers and sisters from which 5 children are victims of progeria .
when doctor asks to pay attention to the deficiency of Iron , Calcium , Folic acid then he says that more for the mother .
to keep a check on growth the weight of the children less than six years is also taken in anganbari .
start taking antioxidants after the age of forty years .
stop urine for a definite time and the duration must be tried to increase up to 3-4 hours gradually , do some exercise of hips and pelvis along with it .
as for example if the menopause of the mother has happened in the age of 45 years and the age of the daughter is 38 years and she wants to get pregnant then in such case it is very difficult for her .
you say that whatever tea I drink , that tea only is given to others , make the guests drink , and not giving any poison .
the ability of sight plays important role in our life .
apple has miraculous effect in many diseases especially those generated by cough phlegm problem .
in addition to this also many problems related to the hair come to the fore , which is necessary to be removed .
after a meal brush your teeth on gargling and after brushing at night surely floss .
change in the nails growing on the inner side of fingers like nails getting thick or colourless is a sign of diabetes foot .
half grain of Ikedrin twice or thrice a day and prostegmine have proved useful in depression disease .
the direct effect on pollution is on eyes .
SARS is called hyper active respiratory syndrome .
mouth starts frothing in epilepsy .
in this way that area is burnt .
with immune capacity lessened these contractions catch these people very easily .
it also does the work of anti oxidants .
in 1970 some sort of reduction in the level of hormone had been brought .
you can stop fluctuations of unbearable pain by carbamazepine and fenitoina or gabapentin or pregabalin .
therefore patients start making a cutback in their food .
it starts healing on its very own with increase in coldness .
but it would be interesting to know here that women face far much danger of the negative effects of tobacco in comparison to males .
water also has an important place in our life for the protection of health .
according to the International Association for Study of Pain , this is such a pain occurring again and again , because of which , but the main reason and cause for its happening is unknown .
first soak it in water for two to four hours .
so it is important that you continuously watch your fitness needs .
patient should get katisnan / waist bath done if it is found from a urine test that sand - like sikta or particles of stones are coming out in his urine .
after annapraasan when external food substances become the diet of his life then all eatables available in natural form should be fed little by little in the form of paste by grinding them after cooking or in the form of juice of fruits .
the results of infection are dependent on the age of patient and state of the capacity of the immune system .
many children are unable to concentrate during these days .
the general test of blood and urine .
in such a fever in which no symptom of any medicine becomes clear then Dr . jar advises to give one - two doses of 30 potency in the beginning itself .
Pyleric sphincter separates the stomach from the dudaenum .
cleaning teeth by making a brush of soft branch of neem or acacia removes odour .
even if urine comes its very little .
if it is the case of it &apos; s treatment then several kinds of treatments are also present .
LAM ( lactation amenorrhea method ) - by feeding ony mother &apos; s milk to the child the menstruation stops in the mother , in such situation it is called lactation amenorrhea .
prevent prompting for little things from which one can reduce stress .
what are you drinking in the name of tea ?
at least as much that causes perspiration .
those who have diabetes or there is a danger of diabetes , eating beans is very beneficial for them .
opening the pores of skin they clean it and remove wrinkles .
one can get also assistance for this .
such a lifestyle does not give rise to one but many diseases .
you can eat cornflakes or porridge in breakfast or getting chapatti made from whole wheat grain take dabbed with a little ghee or butter .
as a consequence of fatty accumulation on all four sides of blood carriers heart rate increases and the results are fatal .
throat feels sort of strangulated .
there is more sweating by the activation of the sweat glands .
in order to evade the diseases we need to give special attention to our diet purification .
this way laughter is the healing and nutritive element of life and it may also be called the essence of life .
pain in head , muscles and joints .
like your food diary tells that you start eating more in anger then whenever you feel anger getting out of the house go for a walk in the park or start playing mission game on computer .
while testing the testicular gland by oneself , if one finds a swelling , cyst or any other kind of defect , particularly an abnormal pain on touching the testicular gland , pain or heaviness , then the doctor should consulted .
now by this new technology . TCRE &apos; , that internal surface of such women are removed from which the blood keeps on flowing .
avoid the direct exposure of warm cooler .
juniper , ginger , rosemary , cajuput , black pepper , coriander , eucalyptus increase blood circulation in body .
besides this honey also has iron , phosphorous , calcium and iodine .
one feels the pain traveling from left side to right side .
you should give strengthening medicines like cod liver oil , iron , quinine , phosphorous , etc .
it is always limited at the back side .
sensitive fruit orange is both sour and sweet .
washing or spraying the nose with disinfectant lotions borax , boric acid , carbolic acid etc .
there is vitamin D in sun rays for strengthening of bones .
abdomen is about 12 inch ( 30 . cm ) ) long and 6 inch wide ( 15 . cm ) at its most stretched point .
in jaundice special attention should be given to diet .
disorder of madness has been called &apos; unmad &apos; in ayurveda .
in what subjects do they get more marks : or in what do they take more interest : how is their speaking ability .
in order to remain healthy drinking the fruit juice has remained our tradition for centuries .
they feel which method should be adopted , what are the side effects of a method , which have what benefits and which contraceptive is good for what age .
becoming restless , shouting and fighting in anger .
one should not take any kind of mental stress do only that work which you like if you go to office then take a leave .
if yes then quickly give him that medicine .
( available in 50 mg . capsule ) which you can easily take regularly .
now treatment of tumor in spine has been considered very hard but today due to a lot of techniques it has become easy .
conscious people have also adopted olive oil advancing a step out of world of refined oil .
false suspicion in which the feeling of doubt subsides after counselling and making aware of the facts .
for example , it maintains a proper tension in our muscles so that we can keep standing erect .
specialists also treat it with artificial light .
let it boil for ten minutes on mild flame .
these lymph nodes of stomach enlarge due to T . . disease also .
it is essential that the care of woman post delivery is taken by female health worker .
do not use it by yourself at night .
this way repeat prishthtanasana three-four times .
on not getting the proper treatment of flu pneumonia may occur .
you can imagine that it is possible to take out any object from inside the body without putting an incision on that part .
other eye problems are found in grwing years of children ( before going to school and at the age of going to school ) .
to apply this physician calls the desiring women immediately after menstruation only when there has been no relationship of woman - man and there has been no conception .
in type 2 diabetes the body does not stay sensitive to the insulin produced inside it .
the massaging should continue for some months after the child birth .
later on what could be the situation of the teeth of these children , this can easily be imagined .
because of this color does not form and it remains white .
he told that only after erasing infection completely the process of new teeth should be begun .
with more tension hormone cortisol harms the hippocampus of the brain seriously .
healthy eating . one should surely take snacks with herbal tea and coffee .
you take consult a doctor about Calcium supplements tablets .
orange is a strong germicide .
breastfeeding for long time , more intelligent children .
negative feelings like fear , depression , anxiety , remorse and anger urge to eat more .
before where the possibility of heart disease between 30 to 40 years of age was sketched , today this possibility has reduced and is found in people of 20 years of age and less .
during pregnancy the women with damaged spinal cord may have to face various types of complications .
eat only on understanding the hunger signal of your body .
anger , greed , fear , anxiety , prejudice all behavious are expressed by the solar plexus center .
only after destroying constipation on obliterating diseases of liver you can get freedom from jofulkalb .
solar plexus is the symbol of fire element .
the greener the salad leaves the more would be the quantity of vitamin c in them .
information for the prevention and treatment of infection produced by reproductive system and sex and protection against AIDS .
the sperm makes the egg conceive .
our hair produce serum naturally , which keeps the moisturizer of the hair balanced .
what is called swine flu ?
by making the reflex actions present by birth as base we go on adding new links on them one after the other .
during this time the probe catches the sound waves sent back by the body .
stop smoking .
in physiotherapy department they make use of techniques like diapulse therapy or pulsar shortwave diathermy , ultraviolet for the treatment of injuries like ulcers of patients and bed sores of diabetes patients .
in some physical disorders also suspicious psychology has been seen to be growing .
it does not have any side-effects .
the foremost genetic locus is H . . . class - II .
